Accept "An Environment for Sustainable Research Software in Germany and Beyond: Current State, Open Challenges, and Call for Action" as an official position of de-RSE e.V. (#1)
DE-RSE/positions: 2020-an-environment-for-sustainable-research-software-in-germany-and-beyond/manuscript.md

    ensure that software-driven research is valid, reproducible and
    sustainable. Software should be recognized as a first class citizen in
    research. This paper is the outcome of two workshops run in Germany in
    2019, at deRSE19 - the first International Conference of Research
    Software Engineers in Germany - and a dedicated DFG-supported follow-up
    workshop in Berlin.
author:
# Main authors (editorial team, alphabetical by last name)
- 'Hartwig Anzt 1,2,†'
- 'Felix Bach 1,†'
- 'Stephan Druskat 3,4,5,†'
- 'Frank Löffler 6,7,8,†'
- 'Axel Loewe 9,*,†'
- 'Bernhard Y. Renard 10,11,†'
- 'Gunnar Seemann 12,13,*,†'
- 'Alexander Struck 14,†'
# Additional authors (alphabetical by last name)
- 'Elke Achhammer 15'
- 'Piush Aggarwal 16'
- 'Franziska Appel 17'
- 'Michael Bader 18'
- 'Lutz Brusch 19'
- 'Peter Ebert 20'
- 'Bernd Flemisch 21'
- 'Sven Friedl 22'
- 'Maximilian D. Funk 23'
- 'Florian Goth 24'
- 'Jean-Noël Grad 25'
- 'Sibylle Hermann 26'
- 'Florian Hohmann 27'
- 'Dominik Kutra 28'
- 'Jan Linxweiler 29'
- 'Thilo Muth 10,30'
- 'Wolfgang Peters-Kottig 31'
- 'Fabian Rack 32'
- 'Fabian H.C. Raters 33'
- 'Stephan Rave 34'
- 'Guido Reina 35'
- 'Timo Ropinski 36,37'

> - 'Joerg Schaarschmidt 38'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 'Joerg Schaarschmidt 38'
- 'Heidi Seibold 42, 43, 44'
```

Reviewer: :point_up_2: of course only if you deem my contributions valuable enough for coauthorship ;)

- 'Jan P. Thiele 39'
- 'Benjamin Uekerman 40'
- 'Stefan Unger 41'

> - 'Rudolf Weeber 42'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 'Rudolf Weeber 25'
```

26. University Library, University of Stuttgart, Germany and 
27. Zentrum für Medien-, Kommunikations- und Informationsforschung (ZeMKI), Universität Bremen, Germany and
28. European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany and 
29. Center for Mechanics, Uncertainty and Simulation in Engineering, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany and 
30. eScience Division, Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, Berlin, Germany and 
31. Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum für Informationstechnik Berlin (ZIB), Germany and 
32. FIZ Karlsruhe - Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure, Germany and
33. Department of Economics, University of Goettingen, Germany and 
34. Applied Mathematics, University of Münster, Germany and
35. Visualization Research Center, University of Stuttgart, Germany and 
36. Institute of Media Informatics, Ulm University, Germany and
37. Department of Science and Technology, Linköping University, Sweden and 
38. Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany and 
39. Institute of Applied Mathematics, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany and 
40. Energy Technology, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands and 

> 41. Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Quedlinburg, Germany

Reviewer: ```suggestion
41. Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Quedlinburg, Germany and
```

> 42. FIXME Rudolf Weeber to add affiliation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
42. LMU Munich, Germany and
43. Bielefeld University, Germany and
44. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
```

    Current State, Open Challenges, and Call for Action
---

Sustainable Software Development; Academic Software; Software
Infrastructure; Software Training; Software Licensing; Research Software

Background
==========

> Meet Kim, who is currently a post-grad PhD student in researchonomy at
> the University of Arcadia. We will follow Kim’s fictional career in
> order to understand different aspects of research software
> sustainability. Note that in Kim’s world, many of the changes this
> paper calls for have already been implemented.  
> (In our example, Kim is a female person. Of course, research software
> engineers (RSEs) could be male, female, or something in between or
> beyond.)

Computational analysis of huge data sets, computer-based simulations,
and software technology play a central role for virtually all scientific
breakthroughs of the 21st century. The first “picture” of a black hole
may be the most prominent recent example where astrophysical experiments
and the collection and processing of data had to be complemented with
sophisticated algorithms and software to enable research excellence (The

> Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019). Similarly, it is

Author: @HeidiSeibold We're citing the project paper, is that sufficient? @astruck Can you resolve please?

research software that allows us to get a glimpse of the consequences
our actions today have on the climate of tomorrow. However, an
implication of computer-based research is that findings and data can
only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is sustained and their functionality
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open
research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial
research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. However, a large share of
researchers base their research on software that was developed in-house

> or as community effort. Many of these software stacks can not be

Author: Hi @HeidiSeibold, thanks very much for your change suggestion <3! 

Unfortunately, the suggestion syntax doesn't work for multi-line comments (something that we need to document in the instructions for further positions). Any chance you could untangle this into single-line suggestions? If not, I'd be happy to do this for you (you're added to the authors list already, so we'll only lose some historical commit data). Thanks!

> or as community effort. Many of these software stacks can not be

Author: Split into single line changes in https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/1/files#r381852711, https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/1/files#r381853070, https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/1/files#r381853437.

@astruck please resolve.

sustained – often because research software was not a first class
deliverable in a research project and hence remained in a prototype
state, or because of missing incentives and resources to maintain the
software after project funding ended. Another fundamental difference to
industrial software development is that most developers of academic
research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)

> never receive training in sustainable software development. In

Author: @astruck please resolve.

> never receive training in sustainable software development. In

Author: Reference `SSIanalysis` also added to Overleaf paper.

10-15, a strong indicator of unmet demand. As another example, the 2019
“Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice” Code of Conduct of
the DFG (DFG 2019a) now explicitly list software side by side with
research results and data. The FAIR principles for research
data (Wilkinson et al. 2016) provide guidelines for data archiving, but
enabling full reproducibility and traceability of research software
requires additional steps (Hasselbring et al. 2019). In consequence,
there are ongoing discussions whether software should be considered as a
specific kind of research data or as a separate entity (Lamprecht et al.
2019).  
Unfortunately, guidelines and policies for sustainable research software
development in Germany are still lacking and long-term funding
strategies are missing. This all leads to unmet requirements and
unsolved challenges that we want to highlight in this paper by
elaborating on i) why sustainable research software development needs to
be considered a first class citizen in the research landscape; ii) how
to decide which software to sustain; iii) who sustains research
software; iv) how software can be funded sustainably; v) what

> infrastructure is needed for sustainable software development; vi) legal

Author: @astruck please resolve.

development. We as a community work hard on overcoming the challenges of
software development in an academic setting, but need support and in
particular reliable funding options and institutional recognition for
the sake of better research.

Why Sustainable Research Software in the First Place?
=====================================================

> After graduation, Kim joins a fixed-term researchonomical research
> project. For her PhD thesis, she wants to crunch some data. Her
> colleague recommends to learn some Boa, which is an all-purpose
> programming language often used in researchonomy. Luckily, the UofA
> runs regular Software Carpentry courses for researchers, including a
> Boa course. Kim takes the course and gains a solid understanding of
> the basics of the Hash shell, version control with Tig, and the basics
> of Boa. She starts writing scripts, which help her a lot with the data
> processing. Unfortunately, Kim’s scripts are quite slow and actually
> break after she installs a newer version of Boa. She visits the weekly
> Code Café organized by her university’s central RSE team. The RSEs not
> only help her update her scripts but also suggest some changes which

> > actually speed up processing by a factor of 25.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> speed up the computation time by a factor of 25.  
```

> During the next meeting with her PhD supervisor, Kim presents her
> collection of scripts. The supervisor encourages Kim to create a Boa
> library from them, as they will be very useful to other
> researchonomists. Thankfully, Kim’s project PI had applied for 3 RSE
> person months in their grant, so the project enlists an RSE from the
> central team. Over the next three months, Kim and the RSE work

> > together to build the library, document it, license it under the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> together to build the library, document it, test it, license it under the
```

outputs, such as software and data sets. Although first
recommendations (Katerbow and Feulner 2018) and policies (Scheliga et
al. 2019) exist, they are far from being widely adapted. It is still
somewhat unclear how to translate good research practice into research
software practice, for example in terms of validity and reproducibility,
but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources.

While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively

> maintained, and  (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code, Smith
et al. 2016, and potentially in an accompanying paper describing the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and  ??? (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).
```

Something is missing where I added `???`

Reviewer 3: (re-)usable

To make it possible to reproduce computationally supported research, a
software that has been used must continue to exist in the first place,
but also continue to be usable, understandable, and reproducible in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
should support reuse scenarios to avoid duplication of efforts, and
unneeded drain of resources. If it is publicly funded, it should also be

> open source and freely accessible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sofware based research (and with that almost any research)
reproducible, the software used must continue to exist. Further it must
continue to be usable, understandable, and results must be return the
same results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
should support reuse scenarios to avoid duplication of efforts, and
unneeded drain of resources. If it is publicly funded, software should be
open source and freely accessible.
```

I tried to make it a little less clunky. Hope it worked :) 
Also I tried to avoid "to make it reproducible, software has to be reproducible".

Reviewer 3: A small remark: "and results must be return the same results" should be sometime like "and return the same results"

> Currently, creating and using sustainable research software is not yet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, creating and using sustainable research software is not 
```

I would use "currently" **or** "yet"

sufficiently incentivized. To evaluate where to address this
shortcoming, we have identified the following challenges:

-   **Lack of benefit for the individual**: The primary motivation for
    sustainable research software is the common benefit, rather than the
    individual benefit. While directing resources towards sustainable
    research software may in the short run yield disadvantages for the
    developing individual (e.g., fewer paper publications) (Bangerth and
    Heister 2014; Prins et al. 2015), it is clearly beneficial for the
    research community as a whole, as it enables better and more
    research by freeing funds for actual research rather than

>     (repetitive) software development.

Author: @HeidiSeibold Thanks! Makes sense. I'll commit these directly rather than splitting up over individual lines :).

-   **Lack of awareness**: Research software sustainability

>     (cf. (Venters et al. 2014; Goble 2014; Druskat 2016; Katz 2018)) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    (cf. Venters et al. 2014; Goble 2014; Druskat 2016; Katz 2018) and
```

What does `cf.` stand for?

Reviewer 4: > short for the Latin: confer/conferatur, both meaning "compare"
([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cf.))

It also confuses me often, it is not as common as "e.g.", "i.e.", which are already confusing by themselves.

Author: The brackets are an artifact of TeX to Markdown conversion. Could change cf. to "see" in the last editorial round.

    its importance is lacking acceptance, and research software
    engineering in its implementation as sustainable software
    development and software maintenance is not sufficiently supported,
    both in Germany and beyond (Brett et al. 2017; Akhmerov, Cruz,
    Drost, Hof, Knapen, Kuzak, Martinez-Ortiz, et al. 2019; Casties et
    al. 2019).

-   **Lack of expertise**: Knowledge about how to create, maintain, and
    support sustainable research software is emerging (Wilson et al.
    2014, 2017; Stodden and Miguez 2014) but has not yet permeated

>     related activities within organizations, specifically teaching,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    related activities within organizations - specifically teaching,
```

    mentoring, and consultancy. This lack of expertise can also lead to
    divergence between software design and community uptake, e.g., if
    the software fails to meet the needs of the target group, or is

>     insufficiently usable. Research Software Engineers combine

Reviewer: I don't quite understand what you want to say here. Maybe rephrase?

Reviewer 5: 1. Lack of training for such expertise
2. Something with "lack of knowledge transfer and research community uptake", and usability
3. Something RSEs are ...

Probably the whole paragraph wants to mention only issue 1

The **general public** benefits from research which supports the common
good, in other terms: creates a better world, faster. They also have an
interest in economical use of their tax money, to which duplicated
efforts to create research software – in contrast to software reuse – is
contrary. A subset of this group may be interested in sustainable, i.e.,
re-usable and understandable, software as part of citizen science.

**Domain researchers** benefit from better software to do more, better,
and faster research. Sustainable research software supports this through
validated functionality (e.g., correct algorithms), the potential for
reuse, and general availability. Sustainable software also potentially
simplifies building upon previous research results by re-using the
involved software to produce additional data, or by extending the
software’s functionality. In light of recent updates to definitions of
good research practice (DFG 2019a), sustainable research software also
allows domain researchers to comply with guidelines and best practices.
Additionally, using a software that is sustainable enough to establish
itself as a standard tool in a field signifies inclusion in a research

> community. Less directly, researchers may benefit from the existence of

Author: Thanks @HeidiSeibold. I think your addition makes a bit of a circuitous point, which I feel is relevant in the broader scope of this paper, but outside of the scope of this section.

support easier. Additionally, they can position themselves at the
forefront of research by bundling expertise on the creation and
maintenance of sustainable research software and installing research
software engineering teams.

**Research funding organizations** have inherent interest in – and
directly benefit from – the existence of sustainable research software
as it allows them to direct more resources towards other research topics
and increase return on investment. At the same time, funding
organizations can create incentives for sustainable software by imposing
policies that reflect the necessity of research software sustainability
and creating respective funding opportunities.

**Industry** benefits from sustainable research software, as the process
of creating and maintaining research software produces a highly-skilled
workforce. Depending on the employed licensing model, sustainable
research software can also be adopted by industry partners to reduce
cost in corporate research and development. Helping to sustain research
software may also enable positive outreach for companies across industry
and into society.

> 

Author: We have a +1 from @knarrff and @axel-loewe for a soft case for an earlier pro-F(L)OSS statement.

> 

Author: Potential places to make this statement: Introduction/Why SRS in the first place.

> 

Author: @sdruskat to add to abstract and intro/Why SRS?

> 

Author: Added a statement: https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/1/files#r393919097.

> RSEs for the central team with the university’s provost for research
> and plan to consider candidates with a background in
> researchonomics.  
> When they get the decision letter from the research funding
> organization, Kim and her co-PI are happy to learn that their new
> project has won the grant. The reviewers specifically point out the
> value of extending Kim’s Boa library to include the proposed new
> methods, as well as the significant reuse potential of *hal9k* for the
> researchonomic community as a direct effect of its well-engineered
> architecture and modularity. Additionally, they stress that it was
> really easy to evaluate the software due to the comprehensive test
> suite, documentation, and example data. In fact, during the first
> month of the new project, three other researchonomic research projects
> approach them to ask whether they can contribute to Kim’s library and
> offer to fund six months of RSE work for this. Kim uses this money to
> also parallelize *hal9k* together with the RSEs and works with her
> university’s computing center to offer it as a standard tool for
> researchonomic supercomputing.

> 

Reviewer 2: Good to hear!

can be evaluated with reasonable effort is a major challenge. On the
other hand, a structured qualitative assessment with scores for groups
of criteria can provide a middle ground. It is clear that both preparing
an application for a review against these criteria from the applicant
side as well as the evaluation by the reviewers requires significant
effort. We believe that the added value significantly outweighs the
investment but appropriate resources need to be factored in. Excellence
as reflected in funded projects, publications, and software adoption,
i.e. backing by a community, should be considered during selection.
Nevertheless, we believe a good scheme should strike a balance between
consolidating the field to few well-established software packages on one
side and stimulating innovation and cooperation promoting diversity in
terms of more than one monopolistic package on the other side. Last but
not least, there is an inherent conflict between the long-term goals of
sustainability funding a software and the necessary reevaluation to
monitor the state of the software over time.

Selection Criteria
------------------

> Several evaluation schemes for research software have been proposed

Reviewer 2: In LaTeX, we've used a numeric citation style, which was converted to parenthetical referencing during conversion to markdown. As we plan to submit the paper to a journal with numeric citation style, I'd rather prefer not to change it here.

practices (Jiménez et al. 2017): public source code, community registry,
license, and governance. Hsu et al. (Hsu, Hutchison, and Langseth 2019)
proposed a framework of seven sustainability influences (outputs
modified, code repository used, champion present, workforce stability,
support from other organizations, collaboration/partnership, and
integration with policy). They found that the various outputs are widely
accessible, but not necessarily sustained or maintained. Projects with
most sustainability influences often became institutionalized and met
required needs of the community (Hsu, Hutchison, and Langseth 2019). In
the field of open source software, the CHAOSS (Community Health
Analytics Open Source Software) project has developed metrics to
evaluate sustainability (CHAOSS 2019). One objective of CHAOSS is to
automatically generate project health reports based on software that
evaluates the metrics, with most of the metrics already covered. The UK
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) suggested both a subjective
tutorial-based and a more objective criteria-based software evaluation
scheme (Jackson, Crouch, and Baxter 2019), the latter being available as

> an online form (SSI 2019a).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an online form (SSI 2019a). ROpenSci provides software reviews
for R developers, which have been very successful in the 
community (see https://devguide.ropensci.org/softwarereviewintro.html). 
```

It wasn't clear to me how to cite the dev guide from ROpenSci. I hope they'll anwer soon https://github.com/ropensci/dev_guide/issues/239

I understand if you do not want to include this example (you already have quite many), but I thought it might be nice to see one where they are not only talking about reviewing software but actually *doing* it.

Reviewer: Another good example might be JORS. However they are less strickt and thorough than ROpenSci.

We drew inspiration from all these works and suggest a set of criteria
to base reviews for sustainable funding on. This set comprises
mandatory, hard criteria that we think have to be fulfilled across
domains (highlighted in bold) and additional desirable, soft criteria
that can be implemented to different degrees depending on the use case
and domain-specific software development requirements. The soft criteria
should be evaluated in a structured way by the reviewers with a specific
response for each section rather than one running text. The fact that
most of these criteria will be considered in any software management

> plan (SMP, compare section   on p. ) (SSI 2019b) highlights its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plan (SMP, compare section ???  on p. ???, SSI 2019b) highlights its
```

Reviewer 2: worked in LaTeX, doesn't work in Markdown

about additional challenges (Li, Chen, and Yan 2019). Therefore, other,
potentially domain-specific, impact measures, such as influence on
policy and practice as well as use in other software and products should
be considered as well to evaluate relevance for academia and society.
Considerable attendance at training and networking events can be
considered as a proof of use as well. (4) A **market analysis** needs to
show that the software is important to a user base of relevant size and
either unique or one of the main players in a field with several
existing solutions. Geographical or political aspects can be considered
as well, e.g. to support the maintenance of a European solution. A
convergence process of (parts of) a research community towards a
specific software stack, i.e. documented transition of several research
groups to a common software, would be a strong indicator of impact.
(5) As community benefits are a central goal of sustained software
funding, outreach and **appropriate training material** for new users of
the software are essential.

### Software Quality

As mandatory criteria of software quality that have to be fulfilled, we

> consider (6) the **public availability of the source code**, with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consider (6) the **public availability of the source code** in both a 
code repository and an archive (for long term availability), 
developed using
```

(7) **version control** (ideally on a public platform).
(8) **Documentation** of the software needs to be publicly available
comprising both user documentation (requirements, installation, getting
started, user manual) and developer documentation (ideally within the
code, e.g. using Doxygen) (Lee 2018). (9) The **license** under which
the software is distributed must be defined and ensure public code
availability and free use, at least for academic purposes.
(10) **Dependencies** on libraries and technologies must be defined.

We acknowledge that some additional criteria have to be evaluated under
consideration of the research domain. These comprise (11) the

> availability of examples (comprising input data and reference results),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
availability of **examples** (comprising input data and reference results),
```

Reviewer 2: the non-bold points were meant as not strictly necessary requirements (see above, "This set comprises
 mandatory, hard criteria that we think have to be fulfilled across domains (highlighted in bold) and additional desirable, soft criteria that can be implemented to different degrees depending on the use case
 and domain-specific software development requirements.")

> (12) mechanisms for extensibility (software modularity) as one aspect of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(12) **mechanisms for extensibility** (software modularity) as one aspect of
```

> software architecture (Venters et al. 2018) and (13) interoperability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
software architecture (Venters et al. 2018) and (13) **interoperability**
```

> (APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) **testing**
```

infrastructure including but not strictly requiring unit tests,
performance tests, regression tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests
(ideally run in an automated fashion in a continuous integration

> environment), (15) tagged releases (considering their frequency, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
environment), (15) **tagged releases** (considering their frequency, and
```

availability for end users in terms of binary packages for major
operating systems, or availability via package managers or containers),
(16) no (large-scale) re-implementations for functionality for which
good solutions already exist. Many of these aspects require appropriate

> infrastructure (see page ).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(16) **no (large-scale) re-implementations for functionality for which
good solutions already exist**. Many of these aspects require appropriate
infrastructure (see page ???).
```

### Maturity

The research software applying for sustained funding must have already
reached a certain level of maturity (typically class 2 or 3 as defined
by Schlauch et al. (Schlauch, Meinel, and Haupt 2018)). A mandatory
requirement is (17) a comprehensive and up-to-date **software management

> plan** (SSI 2019b). The software should (18) be maintainable with an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plan** (SSI 2019b). The software should (18) be **maintainable** with an
```

appropriate amount of resources as detailed in a sustainability section
of the software management plan. The software has (19) a well maintained
website with a clearly defined **point of contact**. Besides an active
user community, sustainable software requires (20) a group of developers

> (i.e., definitely **more than 1 developer**) documented, e.g., by

Reviewer: :rofl:

contributions to the code base or participation in documented, public
discussions or issue tracking. Another criterion is (21) whether

> potential contributors are invited to participate in a clearly defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
potential **contributors are invited** to participate in a clearly defined
```

> science policy, *hal9k* is free software under an open source license,
> and Kim is free to continue her work on the library even after moving
> away from UofA.  
> Due to her involvement in the creation of *hal9k* as well as her
> previous success in attracting funding, Kim has the choice between
> multiple, attractive positions and decides to temporarily move to the
> researchonomics group at Eden University (EdU).She has already
> extended *hal9k* in multiple directions in the past and plans to
> continue this work at EdU. Her group leader at EdU would like to
> continue funding her, but due to a law called the Fixed-term Research
> Contract Bill, EdU is not allowed to extend her contract, and neither
> third-party funding for her own position nor a permanent position are
> available. After having developed a now widely-used research tool,
> several publications in software and paper form, as well as having
> attracted funding, Kim finds herself looking for a job again.

Research relies on software and software relies on the people developing
and maintaining it. Sustainable research requires sustainable software,

> and this in terms requires continuity for those who develop and maintain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and this in turn requires continuity for those who develop and maintain
```

in (Katz et al. 2019).

Challenges
----------

We are currently facing a **lack of awareness** for the importance of
research software as discussed in the section on p. . Moreover, there is
**little recognition** for the efforts put into software development and
maintenance. In consequence, software development in academic settings
is mostly considered as a means to an end and sustainability is often
not considered in project planning and grant proposals and contributes
little to progressing research careers (Science Guide 2019; “San
Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012). The main challenge
here is the continued use of metrics that primarily leverage
traditionally published articles and article citation numbers.

In academia, developers of research software are typically domain
researchers, and in particular if new areas are explored, the software
development process itself has research character. Obviously, developing
research software requires not only domain knowledge but also software
development skills, and the researchers leading the software development
process are often domain experts with substantial software development

> experience. However, the current academic system in Germany does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
experience - which *should* make them extremely valued members of the research community. However, the current academic system in Germany does not
```

Reviewer 6: Thanks - I made it even a little stronger.

mentioned lack of recognition for efforts concerning research software
for faculty appointments within domain sciences.

In order to develop sustainable software, researchers need to have the
**skills and expertise** to build software that is easy to maintain and
extend (Carver, Hong, and Thiruvathukal 2016). However, most of the
researchers are self-taught developers (Wilson et al. 2014; Philippe et
al. 2019). Ideally, these skills have to be built into the domain
science curricula, which could generally be done in two different ways
(or a combination of them). One obvious solution attempt are additional
courses that focus on these topics. The main challenge here is to decide
which other topic(s) to possibly drop due to the limited volume of any
given curriculum. A different approach is to incorporate
software-related topics into existing domain science courses. While this
would provide the benefit of show-casing the usage of specific software
skills directly within the domain science, the challenge here is the
amount of work necessary to change existing lecture material, let alone
the need of the lecturers to acquire those skills themselves in the
first place.

> 

Reviewer: I am missing something on a specific masters degree or side degrees for researchers.

```suggestion
For more focused training we suggest the implementation of masters programs, such that students who find themselves interested in developing software for a specific domain can learn how to do so. For researchers we suggest implementing training programs for software development which lead to a certificate (similar to teaching skills certificates, which are already common at Universities).

```

Reviewer 6: Personally, I think that certificates certainly would not hurt (they usually don't), but offering special Masters programs for RSE withing science X is a topic which can be quite controversial I would imagine. One of the alternative ways to see this is that with software being so central today, its development should be part of the base-Masters program in the first place.

> sustainability. Note that in Kim’s world, many of the changes this
> paper calls for have already been implemented.  
> (In our example, Kim is a female person. Of course, research software
> engineers (RSEs) can be any gender.

Computational analysis of huge data sets, computer-based simulations,
and software technology play a central role for virtually all scientific
breakthroughs of the 21st century. The first “picture” of a black hole
may be the most prominent recent example where astrophysical experiments
and the collection and processing of data had to be complemented with
sophisticated algorithms and software to enable research excellence (The
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019). Similarly, it is
research software that allows us to get a glimpse of the consequences
our actions today have on the climate of tomorrow. However, an
implication of computer-based research is that findings and data can
only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is sustained and their functionality
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open

> research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial

Reviewer 2: Further down we give some more detail. For the aspects discussed here, I feel that they pertain to all variants of "open"

> research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial

Author: @astruck can you resolve please?

> research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial

Author: Keeping the generic "open".

research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. However, a large share of
researchers base their research on software that was developed in-house
or as community effort. Many of these software stacks can not be
sustained – often because research software was not a first class
deliverable in a research project and hence remained in a prototype
state, or because of missing incentives and resources to maintain the

> software after project funding ended. Another fundamental difference to

Author: @astruck please resolve.

industrial software development is that most developers of academic
research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)
never receive training in sustainable software development. In
particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary user of a
software product, there are virtually no incentives to invest in

> sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In

Author: @astruck please resolve.

> sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In

Author: @astruck plesae resolve.

> sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In

Author: I feel that in the interest of correctness, leaving *sustainability* is the right thing to do. And I disagree with the notion that user-developers aren't interested in code documentation or portability, unless they start everything from scratch (which isn't something we'd like to suggest they do). I'll leave as is and refer to future editorial rounds to resolve this if it remains an issue.

> sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In

Author: See comment above, preferring to leave as is.

accept research software engineering as an academic profession that
results in a lack of incentives to produce high-quality software:
producing high software quality is resource-demanding, and although the
San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA (“San Francisco
Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012)) demands for a change in the
academic credit system, many institutions base promotion and
appointments on traditional metrics like the Hirsch index (Hirsch 2005).
It is obvious that an extraordinary amount of idealism is required to
write a sustainable code including documentation and installation
routines, as well as running infrastructure and giving support to others
when the resources can be used more profitably by writing scientific
publications based on fragile prototype software (Bangerth and Heister
2014; Prins et al. 2015).  
Thus, one main factor for the poor sustainability of research software
is the lack of long-term funding for research software engineers
(RSE) (Richardson and Croucher 2018) who take care of the appropriate
architecture, organization, implementation, documentation, and community

> interaction for the software, paired with the implementation of measures

Author: @astruck please resolve.

research in Germany, for example, has opened a call for sustainable
research software development (DFG 2016) at the end of 2016 and a second
call for quality management in research software (DFG 2019b) in June
2019. We note that the first call was oversubscribed by a factor of
10-15, a strong indicator of unmet demand. As another example, the 2019
“Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice” Code of Conduct of
the DFG (DFG 2019a) now explicitly list software side by side with
research results and data. The FAIR principles for research
data (Wilkinson et al. 2016) provide guidelines for data archiving, but
enabling full reproducibility and traceability of research software
requires additional steps (Hasselbring et al. 2019). In consequence,
there are ongoing discussions whether software should be considered as a
specific kind of research data or as a separate entity (Lamprecht et al.
2019).  
Unfortunately, guidelines and policies for sustainable research software
development in Germany are still lacking and long-term funding
strategies are missing. This all leads to unmet requirements and
unsolved challenges that we want to highlight in this paper by

> elaborating on i) why sustainable research software development needs to

Author: @astruck please resolve.

> elaborating on i) why sustainable research software development needs to

Author: Thanks, +1 for use of correct term :).

infrastructure is needed for sustainable software development; vi) legal
aspects of research software development in academia.

While we specifically focus on the research software landscape in
Germany, we are convinced that much of the analysis, findings, and
recommendations may carry beyond. We want to address RSEs that are all
experiencing similar challenges, newcomers to the field of research
software development, but also political and academic decision makers to
increase awareness of the importance and needs of sustainable software
development. We as a community work hard on overcoming the challenges of
software development in an academic setting, but need support and in
particular reliable funding options and institutional recognition for
the sake of better research.

Why Sustainable Research Software in the First Place?
=====================================================

> After graduation, Kim joins a fixed-term researchonomical research
> project. For her PhD thesis, she wants to crunch some data. Her
> colleague recommends to learn some Boa, which is an all-purpose
> programming language often used in researchonomy. Luckily, the UofA

> > runs regular Software Carpentry courses for researchers, including a

Reviewer 3: I would suggest to stick to "Software Carpentry courses" and probably add a linkt to https://software-carpentry.org, to indicate that the name is chosen on purpose.

> Boa course. Kim takes the course and gains a solid understanding of
> the basics of the Hash shell, version control with Tig, and the basics
> of Boa. She starts writing scripts, which help her a lot with the data
> processing. Unfortunately, Kim’s scripts are quite slow and actually
> break after she installs a newer version of Boa. She visits the weekly
> Code Café organized by her university’s central RSE team. The RSEs not
> only help her update her scripts but also suggest some changes which
> actually speed up processing by a factor of 25.  
> During the next meeting with her PhD supervisor, Kim presents her
> collection of scripts. The supervisor encourages Kim to create a Boa
> library from them, as they will be very useful to other
> researchonomists. Thankfully, Kim’s project PI had applied for 3 RSE
> person months in their grant, so the project enlists an RSE from the
> central team. Over the next three months, Kim and the RSE work
> together to build the library, document it, license it under the

> > permissive Comanche license, update the TigHub repository to let

Reviewer 3: +1

> > permissive Comanche license, update the TigHub repository to let

Author: I can see where you're coming from and generally agree with the sentiment, but have decided to keep *Comanche* due to its higher phonetic proximity to *Apache* (and therefore better traceability).

> others contribute, introduce automated builds for every code change
> via a continuous integration platform, and make the library citable.
> Finally, they release the first major version of the library, named
> *hal9k* and publish it through the university library’s software
> portal, where they get a DOI (Digital Object Identifier) for the
> version as well as a concept DOI for any future versions of the
> library. Working with the RSE, Kim has gained a good understanding of
> some methods in software engineering, and she’s thrilled because this
> also means she’ll be able to get a job with a local tech company once
> her fixed-term contract has run out.  
> Kim passes her PhD - of which *hal9k* is an important part - with
> flying colours, and soon citations to her library start appearing in
> the researchonomic literature. To Kim’s surprise, she also reads a
> blog post about a citizen science maker project which has used *hal9k*
> to process researchonomic data measured in a neighbourhood of her
> hometown. She is invited to give a talk at the local office of Siren,
> a global tech company, which look to adopt *hal9k*, and pay Kim

> > handsomely. So handsomely in fact, that Kim can pay a student

Reviewer 5: +1 for your two questions (training or service by the creator of hal9k & hopefully yes, while the enterprise license is maintained by non-profit RSE/community org...)

But I think the organizational matters of a RSE were planned to be outlined as part of chapter iii) and iv) of this white paper (at least that is announced).

> > handsomely. So handsomely in fact, that Kim can pay a student

Author: > on what base does the company pay Kim? Is there dual license in place? There is also the other RSE who worked on the library, does he get paid too?

They are just being paid to give a talk, I'll try to make that clearer.

digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and  (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

To make it possible to reproduce computationally supported research, a
software that has been used must continue to exist in the first place,
but also continue to be usable, understandable, and reproducible in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
should support reuse scenarios to avoid duplication of efforts, and
unneeded drain of resources. If it is publicly funded, it should also be

> open source and freely accessible.

Author: @bussec Thanks, split into single line suggestions and committed.

good research practice (DFG 2019a), sustainable research software also
allows domain researchers to comply with guidelines and best practices.
Additionally, using a software that is sustainable enough to establish
itself as a standard tool in a field signifies inclusion in a research
community. Less directly, researchers may benefit from the existence of
sustainable standard tools as they yield standard formats, which in
themselves facilitate reuse of research data.

**Research Software Engineers (RSEs)** have an intrinsic interest in
sustainable research software. They create better software for research,
which enables more and better research. RSEs have an inherent interest
in developing and working with high quality software, as part of
professional ethics as well as good research practice. RSEs build their
reputation on high quality software and software citation (Smith et al.
2016; Druskat 2019), which will open up new career paths. Finally, for
RSEs, creating sustainable research software is part of an attractive,
intellectually challenging, and satisfying work environment.

**Research leaders** as well as **research performing organizations

> (RPO)** mainly focus on the economic aspects and management of research,

Author: @bussec thanks, removed unnecessary abbreviation.

more future-proof, and more easily traceable, reproducible, and
verifiable and thus more likely to attract additional resources
(including human resources). **RPOs** can additionally benefit from
sustainable research software if it can be reused in other areas,
creating synergies between different research disciplines. These
synergies typically free resources that can then be used in areas other
than software development and maintenance. Finally, organizations can
gain highly competitive positions in terms of funding and hiring
opportunities, as well as a reputation for being on the cutting edge of
research, through early adoption of research software engineering units,
and the implementation of sustainable research software policy and
practice.

**Geopolitical units** have a strategic interest to be independent of
other geopolitical units to ensure that research can continue seamlessly
regardless of geopolitical developments and ensuing embargoes on
information flow. Reuse of sustainable software additionally frees up
funding for uses other than software development. Well-established,
sustainable software systems can also attract researchers and companies

> in the research and technology sector.

Author: @bussec Thanks. Perhaps we should re-introduce the glossary, as "Geopolitical unit" was meant to target everything from communes to alliances such as the EU. If the US started to sanction exports (in the legal term) of software to other countries or alliances, the latter would be well-advised to have independently-working (and open source) research software. This was the general direction of the argument. So I guess re 2.:

a. The EU could (I'm not convinced we say "should" as this paragraph lists a bird-eye view of interest in sustainable research software), for example, strive for independence from other players such as the US, in terms of the tools they use to do research.
b. Sustainable (FOSS) research software is great for everyone, including "rogue states", but also states with under-budgeted education sectors.

> in the research and technology sector.

Author: @bussec Please unresolve if my answer isn't sufficient to resolve this. Thanks!

> in the research and technology sector.

Reviewer 7: @sdruskat:
1. I agree that "geopolitical unit" does have a broader meaning, but in the context of independence and embargos noone will think about muncipalities, as embargos are usually applied at the national level. IMO the term "sovereign state" (alternatively "national state") is right 90%+ of the time (and not grossly misleading in the remaining cases), but it makes the text less clunky to read.
2. The "embargo" part creates a "cold war" framing, which we can avoid if we take it out and focus more on independence and well-fare.

My suggestion would therefore be to replace the first two sentences as follows:

**Sovereign states** have a strategic interest for scientific independence and domestic economic growth.
Here, reuse of sustainable software can help by avoiding double-spending scarce research funds on re-development of existing software.

> in the research and technology sector.

Reviewer 7: BTW: I cannot "unresolve" conversations.

evaluates the metrics, with most of the metrics already covered. The UK
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) suggested both a subjective
tutorial-based and a more objective criteria-based software evaluation
scheme (Jackson, Crouch, and Baxter 2019), the latter being available as
an online form (SSI 2019a).

We drew inspiration from all these works and suggest a set of criteria
to base reviews for sustainable funding on. This set comprises
mandatory, hard criteria that we think have to be fulfilled across
domains (highlighted in bold) and additional desirable, soft criteria
that can be implemented to different degrees depending on the use case
and domain-specific software development requirements. The soft criteria
should be evaluated in a structured way by the reviewers with a specific
response for each section rather than one running text. The fact that
most of these criteria will be considered in any software management
plan (SMP, compare section   on p. ) (SSI 2019b) highlights its
importance for sustainable research software.

### Usage and Impact

Requirements qualifying software for sustained funding are (1) its **use

> beyond a single research group**, (2) the scientific relevance and

Reviewer 2: Felix, please resolve below

> beyond a single research group**, (2) the scientific relevance and

Author: Transferred to Overleaf.

potentially domain-specific, impact measures, such as influence on
policy and practice as well as use in other software and products should
be considered as well to evaluate relevance for academia and society.
Considerable attendance at training and networking events can be
considered as a proof of use as well. (4) A **market analysis** needs to
show that the software is important to a user base of relevant size and
either unique or one of the main players in a field with several
existing solutions. Geographical or political aspects can be considered
as well, e.g. to support the maintenance of a European solution. A
convergence process of (parts of) a research community towards a
specific software stack, i.e. documented transition of several research
groups to a common software, would be a strong indicator of impact.
(5) As community benefits are a central goal of sustained software
funding, outreach and **appropriate training material** for new users of
the software are essential.

### Software Quality

As mandatory criteria of software quality that have to be fulfilled, we
consider (6) the **public availability of the source code**, with

> (7) **version control** (ideally on a public platform).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(7) **version control** with meaningful commit messages and linked to an issue tracker (ideally maintained, but at least mirrored on a public platform)
``

(8) **Documentation** of the software needs to be publicly available
comprising both user documentation (requirements, installation, getting

> started, user manual) and developer documentation (ideally within the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
started, user manual) and developer documentation (with a development guide, release notes and API docs within the
```

code, e.g. using Doxygen) (Lee 2018). (9) The **license** under which
the software is distributed must be defined and ensure public code

> availability and free use, at least for academic purposes.

Reviewer 2: We are aware that a restriction to academic purposes is incompatible with OSI and FSF definitions. However, the group felt that such restriction might be beneficial for some funding scenarios (revenue from commercial users) that would not be possible otherwise. A highly debated topic but the definition above was what the group agreed on in the end.

(10) **Dependencies** on libraries and technologies must be defined.

We acknowledge that some additional criteria have to be evaluated under
consideration of the research domain. These comprise (11) the
availability of examples (comprising input data and reference results),
(12) mechanisms for extensibility (software modularity) as one aspect of
software architecture (Venters et al. 2018) and (13) interoperability
(APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) testing
infrastructure including but not strictly requiring unit tests,
performance tests, regression tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests
(ideally run in an automated fashion in a continuous integration
environment), (15) tagged releases (considering their frequency, and
availability for end users in terms of binary packages for major
operating systems, or availability via package managers or containers),
(16) no (large-scale) re-implementations for functionality for which
good solutions already exist. Many of these aspects require appropriate
infrastructure (see page ).

> 

Reviewer 8: An often overlooked but nevertheless important aspect is the communication between users and developers of a software: As the software matures and gets new releases, the users have to be notified of these updates. The users on the other hand have to be able to easily reach out to the development team with suggestions and issue reports. Even in a small environment, like an office internal software project, the expectations from the users and the plans from the development team easily go in different directions, if issues and progress are not being tracked in a transparent manner like an issue tracking system.

Reviewer 2: I've integrated this aspect below in the the Maturity section

> attracted funding, Kim finds herself looking for a job again.

Research relies on software and software relies on the people developing
and maintaining it. Sustainable research requires sustainable software,
and this in terms requires continuity for those who develop and maintain
it.

Requirements
------------

Possibly the most important demand is the need for an increase in
**recognition and awareness** of research software as a first class
citizen in research (Akhmerov, Cruz, Drost, Hof, Knapen, Kuzak,
Martinez-Ortiz, et al. 2019; Chue Hong 2019; Scheliga et al. 2019). For
sustainability of research software, long-term commitments of the
respective software leads are crucial, but no **professional RSE
profiles** currently exist. In consequence, it is essential to create
career paths for research software engineers (RSEs) that are attractive
and include permanency. While creating permanent positions in the German
academic system below the faculty level is an actively discussed topic
overall (Vereinigung der Kanzlerinnen und Kanzler der Universitäten
Deutschlands 2019), we specifically focus on the needs stemming from the

> development and maintenance of research software here.

Reviewer 9: this whole section is very university centric. How about Helmholtz' HiFiS? Was bei Leibniz Open Science abgeht kann ich nicht einschätzen

Author: Are there citable works from non-uni institutions regarding this?

As already mentioned, research software development not only requires
domain expertise, but also software development **education, skills, and
competencies**. Currently, most of the domain researchers developing and
maintaining domain-specific software technology never received
professional training on software development (Wilson et al. 2014;
Philippe et al. 2019). To enhance the productivity and sustainability of
computer-based research, it is essential to integrate software

> development training into the education of domain researchers.

Reviewer 9: How about putting software engineers/computer scientists aside the researchers? If researchers brains are full with science, put an engineering brain aside. Personally I see both ways viable. Educate researchers and/or make use collaboration a reality.

Reviewer 6: I agree, in principle. There is the problem that the "other partner" aside the "regular" scientist does not really exist: a SE-scientist is interested mostly in bringing that field forward and not so much in "just" applying existing knowledge, and a professional SD rarely has a viable career path in science currently.

Reviewer 6: We already argue elsewhere that these roles should exist. Here, I would like to keep the focus on training.

**little recognition** for the efforts put into software development and
maintenance. In consequence, software development in academic settings
is mostly considered as a means to an end and sustainability is often
not considered in project planning and grant proposals and contributes
little to progressing research careers (Science Guide 2019; “San
Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012). The main challenge
here is the continued use of metrics that primarily leverage
traditionally published articles and article citation numbers.

In academia, developers of research software are typically domain
researchers, and in particular if new areas are explored, the software
development process itself has research character. Obviously, developing
research software requires not only domain knowledge but also software
development skills, and the researchers leading the software development
process are often domain experts with substantial software development
experience. However, the current academic system in Germany does not
provide a defined **RSE role**. Limited-term positions are, at least
currently within the main German academic system, often effectively the

> end of their career path, sometimes even a dead end. The challenge here

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
end of their career path, sometimes even a dead end in isolation (RSE teams are very rare). The challenge here
```

is the lack of available permanent positions within the non-professorial
academic faculty (“Mittelbau”) in Germany, as well as the already
mentioned lack of recognition for efforts concerning research software

> for faculty appointments within domain sciences.

Reviewer 9: This leads to ignorance in HR (human resources) in regards to RSE career advice/development. This also leads to non offering of training. No careers need no training.

Reviewer 6: Stimmt, haben wir aber glaube auch schon.

In order to develop sustainable software, researchers need to have the
**skills and expertise** to build software that is easy to maintain and
extend (Carver, Hong, and Thiruvathukal 2016). However, most of the
researchers are self-taught developers (Wilson et al. 2014; Philippe et
al. 2019). Ideally, these skills have to be built into the domain
science curricula, which could generally be done in two different ways
(or a combination of them). One obvious solution attempt are additional
courses that focus on these topics. The main challenge here is to decide
which other topic(s) to possibly drop due to the limited volume of any
given curriculum. A different approach is to incorporate
software-related topics into existing domain science courses. While this
would provide the benefit of show-casing the usage of specific software
skills directly within the domain science, the challenge here is the
amount of work necessary to change existing lecture material, let alone
the need of the lecturers to acquire those skills themselves in the

> first place.

Reviewer 9: Doing this introduces the challenge of educating people twice. First in the domain and secondly for software engineering. SE itself is a craftsmanship. This way you create double headed personal. Also with personal rotation, you loose all the SE education efforts regularly.

Reviewer 6: We do mention this as alternative approaches, to avoid educating people twice. Concerning the rotation: you do loose them anyway, that problem is independent of the issue here - apart from the expectation that the better they are educated concerning SE, the easier you might loose them because their value for industry will be a lot higher too, not just for science. But that's a price we cannot avoid.

science, volunteers hardly receive recognition for their work “back
home”, i.e., within their domain, underlining again the importance of
our first demand.

Recommendations
---------------

Increasing **recognition and awareness** is a challenge that calls for
both immediate action and perseverance. Nevertheless, some measures will
likely show positive effects comparatively soon:

Similarly to plans for research data management, funding agencies should
request that applicants include considerations about how software
developed in a project can be sustained beyond the end of the funded
project. A follow up on these plans during and after the project
lifetime, i.e., a dedicated software management plan, is crucial.

Another recommendation is aimed at decision makers concerning
recruitment for academic positions: broaden the definition of research
impact beyond traditional scientific publications to also include other
impactful results. Not all researchers thinking of themselves as RSEs
pursue a faculty position as their main career goal. However, permanent
non-professorial academic faculty positions are rare within the German

> academic system, also due to the lack of a defined **RSE role**. We

Reviewer 9: again, university perspective. Maybe adding group leader as second semi-permanent position adds non university perspective?

Reviewer 6: changed towards this end

recommend research institutions to leverage the benefit of dedicated
RSEs by establishing attractive long-term career options in the academic
environment. The long-term solution in order to gain sufficient software
development **skills** should be education that is included early in the
career path, ideally already at the Bachelor level. For the time being
however, efforts involving workshops and seminars that provide easy
access to hands-on training on software-related questions should be

> promoted and supported as much as possible.

Reviewer 9: Opening the domains to software engineers is also an option.

Reviewer 6: If you mean including SE topics into the domains, that is what the paragraph sees as vision. If you mean allowing SE (computer scientists) into the domains: this is an interesting idea, but usually seen as 'too hard' (from the side of the domains, that is).

> Kim is proactively asked to apply for - and is subsequently awarded -
> a permanent RSE position at the institute for researchonomy at UofA,
> based on her work on the library. She works closely with the central
> RSE team, but mostly due to bureaucracy and the high demand for her
> library, Kim does not have enough time to maintain and further develop
> *hal9k* alone anymore. Together with the dean she develops a course
> for the researchonomics curriculum which teaches data processing with
> *hal9k*. As a lesson from her own career, she starts the course with
> sessions on the Hash shell, version control with Tig, Boa, and two
> whole sessions on basics of sustainable software development. This is
> very fruitful, and due to the implementation of a new research
> software funding scheme at UofA, Kim is able to hire one of the course
> students, who has shown great research software engineering skills
> straight into a long-term position at her institute, where they focus
> on the maintenance and development of *hal9k*, work with the computing
> center to support *hal9k*-based supercomputing on a new, dedicated
> FGPA cluster, develop training materials for external users, and

> > organize the yearly *hal9k* users and developers conference. Kim gets

Reviewer: As far as I understood, there are only 2 developer of *hal9k* atm (Kim and the student she hired). Should we mention others in this part? Other researcher / RSEs who extend the software because they need the functionality?

Reviewer: Should we also mention community management beyond events? In my experience this is a very important part. See also "The Art of Community: Building the New Age of Participation, Jono Bacon" https://www.amazon.de/gp/product/B008224FMC/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_search_asin_title?ie=UTF8&psc=1

Reviewer 10: I would prefer not to make the story more complex, but rather have the community management included down below in line 997

Author: > As far as I understood, there are only 2 developer of _hal9k_ atm (Kim and the student she hired). Should we mention others in this part? Other researcher / RSEs who extend the software because they need the functionality?

At this stage, there have been collaborations with other research facilities, so I guess rather few developers & quite a few users. Good enough to run a conference for them I think?

> to travel the world to visit researchonomics groups who are using
> *hal9k*.

Requirements
------------

Sustainable funding for research software boils down to funding the four
main pillars enabling sustainable software development: i) Personnel
with expertise in research software development; ii) Infrastructure for
developing, testing, validating, and benchmarking research software, and

> distributed versioning systems for collaborative software development;

Reviewer 9: how about execution environments? Having a jupyter notebook server at hand is useful too. As mention previously, telemetry infrastructure could be needed as well

Reviewer 10: certainly useful elements, but I would like to avoid adding more and more details here and deluting the main message of funding personal, infrastructure and training

iii) Training in software design and sustainable software development;

> and iv) Community events for creating synergies between research groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and iv) Community management and events for creating synergies between research groups
```

Reviewer 10: good point

and software efforts.

Challenges
----------

Short-term engagement of (young) researchers raises the question of how
to maintain a constant level of expertise within a developer team and
preventing knowledge drain concerning domain knowledge and software
engineering skills. Conversely, the permanent engagement of qualified
personnel requires to offer career perspectives, especially due to the
fact that academia competes with industry for the same people. A
challenge specific to Germany is posed by the shortage of permanent
positions and by the restrictions for temporary positions due to the
German *Wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetz* (Bundesministerium der Justiz

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Reviewer 2: This is a results of converting the numeric citation scheme to parenthetical referencing during LaTeX -> Markdown. I agree that if we decide to publish the Markdown version on a web page, we should probably adjust these references.

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Reviewer 2: The WissZeitVG was published in 2007 and last adapted in 2017: http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/wisszeitvg/BJNR050610007.html What's the proper year for the reference?

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Reviewer 10: I guess the last adaption

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Author: **TODO**

- Pick correct citation metadata
- Also change in `.bib` in Overleaf.

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Reviewer 2: done

travel and research visits. Creating a research software community
however requires funding for community and training events as well as
“virtual hardware” such as webspace, versioning systems, task-managing
systems, and compute cycles. These demands can hardly be met without
third-party funding (Kuchinke et al. 2016; Chang, Mills, and Newhouse
2007; Aartsen et al. 2018; Gabella, Durinx, and Appel 2018).

Recommendation: Creation of Adequate Funding Schemes
----------------------------------------------------

Funding is a crucial factor for sustaining research software. Currently
available sources and instruments are not adequately shaped for the
challenges and solutions outlined above. We recommend actions on the
individual, organizational, and national level.

Existing project-focused funding instruments on the local, national, and
international level need to be complemented with funding instruments
specifically designed for research software development and sustained
research software maintenance to make research software a first class
citizen in the research landscape. For example, software projects
enhancing research and fulfilling the sustainability criteria detailed

> in section  on p.  may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in section  on p. ??? may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they
```

live up to the standards and remain a central component of the research
landscape.

> 

Reviewer: It might make sense to cite Andi Müller's blog post in this section https://peekaboo-vision.blogspot.com/2020/01/dont-fund-software-that-doesnt-exist.html

Reviewer 10: My understanding of the blog post is that it focuses on the question which projects to *initially* fund - which is discussed further up front in this paper. The paragraph at hand focuses more on the questions of sustainable funding of already initialized projects. So I would not like to cite it here.

University computing centers and supercomputing facilities need to
receive earmarked resources for the support of sustainable software

> development. This funding is necessary to provide continuous integration

Reviewer 9: Scientific computing facilities would be the non university equivalent

Reviewer 10: yes, you are right - for the sake of consistency, we should write scientific instead of university.

Author: Slightly re-worded to avoid "scientific" in favour of "research", see line 1061. Hope that's okay @b-y-r & @StephanJanosch?

services, a hardware portfolio for development, testing and benchmarking
software, as well as personnel for training domain researchers in
software design and the proper usage of the services.

The creation and maintenance of training material for general research
software engineering education and the software-specific documentation

> and tutorial creation needs to be reflected in funding opportunities.

Reviewer 9: why 'general research software engineering education'? Can't  this be a specialisation on top of computer science education?

Reviewer 10: can, but does not have to - so I would suggest to keep it in the more generic way

This can either happen by dedicating modules of research or software
grants to providing support and the generation of training material, or
by opening funding schemes focusing on interdisciplinary software
development education. The latter may include research that looks at
research software development as a process to analyze which measures,
interactions, and team compositions make research software successful.
Additionally, funding instruments fostering the formation of research
software communities have to be established.

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software
> Engineering Consortium to set up *hal9k* on the Consortium’s
> distributed TigHub instance, and organize world-wide access to it via

> > the NRSEC-AAI. Going forward, the Consortium’s Research Software Hub -

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
> the NRSEC-AAI federation. Going forward, the Consortium’s Research Software Hub -
```
explaining what AAI is about

> > a registry and Software Heritage Archive-based long-term repository

Reviewer: Add footnote (or something similar) with link to https://www.softwareheritage.org

Author: Thanks! Pretty sure we have a proper ref to SWH in here somewhere, so we can re-use it here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> a registry and [softwareHeritage.org](softwareHeritage.org) archive-based long-term repository
```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> a registry and [Software Heritage Archive](softwareHeritage.org)-based long-term repository
```

> for research software on a national level - ingests *hal9k* releases
> with complete metadata: citation metadata, the *hal9k* provenance
> graph and computational environment information, ORCID iDs, etc. and

> > provides its own DOIs for versions under a concept DOI. The community

Reviewer 9: again very concrete names for the fictional world. How about CIROD ids? Instead of DOI maybe use more general PID term?

Reviewer 6: Interesting also: ORCID stands for Open Researcher and Contributor ID, so there is no "ORCID ID", although even on their web page they use it like that.

> reviews all code and documentation changes that are contributed to
> *hal9k* via the central TigHub, and the Hub’s CI system Alfred builds,
> tests, and pushes new releases automatically to the registered
> supercomputing clusters. Especially the community efforts become
> better and more streamlined by the day, as research software
> development training is now offered as part of most curricula, and
> skilled RSEs are now much easier to find and hire by research
> institutions.

Project Management Tools
------------------------

Research software is developed by individual researchers, in small teams
within a single institution, or in larger teams distributed across
multiple institutions. In particular if software development is
distributed across institutions, there exists an urgent need for
frameworks and tools enabling collaborative code development, software
feature planning, and software management. As research software
development typically includes bleeding-edge research and development

> that the researche

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Renard, Seemann, Seibold, Struck, Thiele, Uekermann
```

> that the researche

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Renard, Seemann, Seibold, Struck, Thiele, Uekermann
```

> that the researche

Reviewer 9: ORCIDs are for persons right? So it can't be used identifying software, or?

> that the researche

Reviewer 9: Needs NFDI to be mentioned here as well?

> that the researche

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
We consider GitLab or GitHub as collaborative working environments and
```
bring naming order in line with later order

> that the researche

Reviewer 7: Best to my knowledge, ORCID is a persistent identifier for natural persons, not for digital objects like software.

Reviewer 6: I agree. DOI would be a better term here, as "digital object identifier", although the usual "DOI" it has problems when applied to software.

> that the researche

Reviewer 7: I agree with the statement, but we should be clearer with our recommendations regarding these service. Should we recommend to avoid them (as we have seen enough exploitative schemes in academic publishing)? Or should we embrace them (as only commercial services can provide the necessary professionalism to guarantee long-term stability)? I assume the former...

> that the researche

Reviewer 4: This reference does not look quite right: "Public Money, Public Code" is a campaign by the Free Software Foundation Europe, which is not an official European organization. It is also not a person name, so it should (in my opinion) not be written with a comma in between.

```suggestion
Free Software Foundation Europe. 2019. “Public Money Public Code.”
```

Reviewer 4: Something looks very odd in the suggestion. Intended:

```diff
- licenses, following the paradigm of “public money, public code” (Europe
- 2019)
+ licenses, following the paradigm of “public money, public code” (fsfe
+ 2017)
```

> that the researche

Reviewer 4: See comment on the references

```suggestion
licenses, following the paradigm of “public money, public code” (fsfe
```

> that the researche

Reviewer 4: See comment on the references

```suggestion
2017).
```

> that the researche

Reviewer 6: I would also rank some solutions above others, but I would not exclude commercial solutions just because they are commercial. The term "which exploit taxpayer-funded research results" is not necessarily always "bad", even though it sadly often has this "taste". Of course, research results should be usable(exploitable) for companies. And back to github: it likely wouldn't be number one on my recommendation list either, but it would certainly be on the list, and quite high-up. Especially for research, usage is essentially free, providing a valuable service.

only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is available and
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open
research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial
research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. However, a large share of
researchers base their research on software that was developed in-house
or as community effort. Many of these software stacks can not be
sustained – often because research software was not a first class
deliverable in a research project and hence remained in a prototype
state, or because of missing incentives and resources to maintain the
software after project funding ended. Another fundamental difference to
industrial software development is that most developers of academic
research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)
never receive training in sustainable software development. In
particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary user of a

> software product, there are virtually no incentives to invest in

Reviewer 2: +1

outputs, such as software and data sets. Although first
recommendations (Katerbow and Feulner 2018) and policies (Scheliga et
al. 2019) exist, they are far from being widely adapted. It is still
somewhat unclear how to translate good research practice into research
software practice, for example in terms of validity and reproducibility,
but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources.

While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively

> maintained, and  (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).
```

research software can also be adopted by industry partners to reduce
cost in corporate research and development. Helping to sustain research
software may also enable positive outreach for companies across industry
and into society.

How to Decide Which Software to Sustain?
========================================

> Kim’s PI is happy, because Kim writes a longer section on *hal9k* for
> the final project report and provides a software management plan
> alongside it, which ticks off a box in the template that the PI had
> previously worried about. The PI does not want to let Kim go and
> instead offers her to be co-PI on a follow-up project to test new
> methods on the data, and integrate them into *hal9k* as well. They are
> positive that such a project proposal has a good chance to be funded,
> as they can show impact of their first project via their university’s
> current research information system (CRIS) and through the number of
> citations of *hal9k* and the publications for which it was used. While
> they write the proposal, the faculty dean approaches the two to tell
> them that based on Kim’s work, they will now negotiate about two new

> > RSEs for the central team with the university’s provost for research

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> members for the central RSE team with the university’s provost for research
```

practices (Jiménez et al. 2017): public source code, community registry,
license, and governance. Hsu et al. (Hsu, Hutchison, and Langseth 2019)
proposed a framework of seven sustainability influences (outputs
modified, code repository used, champion present, workforce stability,
support from other organizations, collaboration/partnership, and
integration with policy). They found that the various outputs are widely
accessible, but not necessarily sustained or maintained. Projects with
most sustainability influences often became institutionalized and met
required needs of the community (Hsu, Hutchison, and Langseth 2019). In
the field of open source software, the CHAOSS (Community Health
Analytics Open Source Software) project has developed metrics to
evaluate sustainability (CHAOSS 2019). One objective of CHAOSS is to
automatically generate project health reports based on software that
evaluates the metrics, with most of the metrics already covered. The UK
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) suggested both a subjective
tutorial-based and a more objective criteria-based software evaluation
scheme (Jackson, Crouch, and Baxter 2019), the latter being available as

> an online form (SSI 2019a). ROpenSci provides software reviews

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an online form (SSI 2019a). [ROpenSci](https://devguide.ropensci.org/softwarereviewintro.html) provides software reviews
```

for R developers, which have been very successful in the 

> community (see https://devguide.ropensci.org/softwarereviewintro.html). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
community. 
```

We drew inspiration from all these works and suggest a set of criteria
to base reviews for sustainable funding on. This set comprises
mandatory, hard criteria that we think have to be fulfilled across
domains (highlighted in bold) and additional desirable, soft criteria
that can be implemented to different degrees depending on the use case
and domain-specific software development requirements. The soft criteria
should be evaluated in a structured way by the reviewers with a specific
response for each section rather than one running text. The fact that
most of these criteria will be considered in any software management

> plan (SMP, compare section   on p. ) (SSI 2019b) highlights its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
plan (SMP, SSI 2019b) highlights its
```

> a registry and Software Heritage Archive-based long-term repository
> for research software on a national level - ingests *hal9k* releases
> with complete metadata: citation metadata, the *hal9k* provenance
> graph and computational environment information, ORCID iDs, etc. and
> provides its own DOIs for versions under a concept DOI. The community
> reviews all code and documentation changes that are contributed to
> *hal9k* via the central TigHub, and the Hub’s CI system Alfred builds,
> tests, and pushes new releases automatically to the registered
> supercomputing clusters. Especially the community efforts become
> better and more streamlined by the day, as research software
> development training is now offered as part of most curricula, and
> skilled RSEs are now much easier to find and hire by research
> institutions.

Project Management Tools
------------------------

Research software is developed by individual researchers, in small teams
within a single institution, or in larger teams distributed across
multiple institutions. In particular if software development is
distributed across institutions, there exists an urgent need for

> frameworks and tools enabling col

Reviewer 2: Felix: please address @StephanJanosch' comment above regarding telemetry to track usage here.

Author: Transferred to Overleaf.

as well, e.g. to support the maintenance of a European solution. A
convergence process of (parts of) a research community towards a
specific software stack, i.e. documented transition of several research
groups to a common software, would be a strong indicator of impact.
(5) As community benefits are a central goal of sustained software
funding, outreach and **appropriate training material** for new users of
the software are essential.

### Software Quality

As mandatory criteria of software quality that have to be fulfilled, we
consider (6) the **public availability of the source code** in both a 
code repository and an archive (for long term availability), 
developed using
(7) **version control** with meaningful commit messages and linked to an issue tracker (ideally maintained, but at least mirrored on a public platform)
(8) **Documentation** of the software needs to be publicly available
comprising both user documentation (requirements, installation, getting
started, user manual, release notes) and developer documentation (with a development guide and API documentation within the
code, e.g. using Doxygen) (Lee 2018). (9) The **license** under which

> the software is distributed must be defined and ensure public code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> availability and free use, at least for academic purposes.

Reviewer 2: the software is distributed must be defined. Publicly funded software
should be published under a Free and Open Source Software license
by default, although exceptions to this might apply (e.g., excluding commercial use).

> availability and free use, at least for academic purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the software is distributed must be defined. Publicly funded software
should be published under a Free and Open Source Software license
by default, although exceptions to this might apply (e.g., excluding commercial use).
```

    personnel, funding, infrastructure and legal aspects. We address
    political and academic decision makers to increase awareness of the
    importance and needs of sustainable research software practices. In
    particular, we recommend strategies and measures to create an
    environment for sustainable research software, with the ultimate goal to
    ensure that software-driven research is valid, reproducible and
    sustainable. Software should be recognized as a first class citizen in
    research. This paper is the outcome of two workshops run in Germany in
    2019, at deRSE19 - the first International Conference of Research
    Software Engineers in Germany - and a dedicated DFG-supported follow-up
    workshop in Berlin.
author:
# Main authors (editorial team, alphabetical by last name)
- 'Hartwig Anzt 1,2,†'
- 'Felix Bach 1,†'
- 'Stephan Druskat 3,4,5,†'
- 'Frank Löffler 6,7,8,†'
- 'Axel Loewe 9,*,†'
- 'Bernhard Y. Renard 10,11,†'
- 'Gunnar Seemann 12,13,*,†'
- 'Alexander Struck 14,†'
# Additional authors (alphabetical by last name)
- 'Elke Achhammer 15'
- 'Piush Aggarwal 16'
- 'Franziska Appel 17'
- 'Michael Bader 18'

> - 'Lutz Brusch 19'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 'Lutz Brusch 19'
- 'Christian Busse 46'
```

> - 'Peter Ebert 20'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 'Gerasimos Chourdakis 47'
- 'Peter Ebert 20'
```

- 'Bernd Flemisch 21'
- 'Sven Friedl 22'
- 'Maximilian D. Funk 23'
- 'Florian Goth 24'
- 'Jean-Noël Grad 25'
- 'Sibylle Hermann 26'
- 'Florian Hohmann 27'

> - 'Dominik Kutra 28'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 'Stephan Janosch 45'
- 'Dominik Kutra 28'
```

29. Center for Mechanics, Uncertainty and Simulation in Engineering (MUSEN), Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany and 
30. eScience Division, Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, Berlin, Germany and 
31. Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum für Informationstechnik Berlin (ZIB), Germany and 
32. FIZ Karlsruhe - Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure, Germany and
33. Department of Economics, University of Goettingen, Germany and 
34. Applied Mathematics, University of Münster, Germany and
35. Visualization Research Center, University of Stuttgart, Germany and 
36. Institute of Media Informatics, Ulm University, Germany and
37. Department of Science and Technology, Linköping University, Sweden and 
38. Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany and 
39. Institute of Applied Mathematics, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany and 
40. Energy Technology, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands and 
41. Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Quedlinburg, Germany and
42. LMU Munich, Germany and
43. Bielefeld University, Germany and

> 44. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
44. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
45. Max Planck Institue of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany
```

Considerable attendance at training and networking events can be
considered as a proof of use as well. (4) A **market analysis** needs to
show that the software is important to a user base of relevant size and
either unique or one of the main players in a field with several
existing solutions. Geographical or political aspects can be considered
as well, e.g. to support the maintenance of a European solution. A
convergence process of (parts of) a research community towards a
specific software stack, i.e. documented transition of several research
groups to a common software, would be a strong indicator of impact.
(5) As community benefits are a central goal of sustained software
funding, outreach and **appropriate training material** for new users of
the software are essential.

### Software Quality

As mandatory criteria of software quality that have to be fulfilled, we
consider (6) the **public availability of the source code** in both a 
code repository and an archive (for long term availability), 
developed using
(7) **version control** with meaningful commit messages and linked to an issue tracker (ideally maintained, but at least mirrored on a public platform)

> ``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

(8) **Documentation** of the software needs to be publicly available
comprising both user documentation (requirements, installation, getting

> started, user manual) and developer documentation (with a development guide, release notes and API docs within the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
started, user manual, release notes) and developer documentation (with a development guide and API documentation within the
```

should be published under a Free and Open Source Software license
by default, although exceptions to this might apply (e.g., excluding commercial use).
(10) **Dependencies** on libraries and technologies must be defined.

We acknowledge that some additional criteria have to be evaluated under
consideration of the research domain. These comprise (11) the
availability of examples (comprising input data and reference results),
(12) mechanisms for extensibility (software modularity) as one aspect of
software architecture (Venters et al. 2018) and (13) interoperability
(APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) testing
infrastructure including but not strictly requiring unit tests,
performance tests, regression tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests
(ideally run in an automated fashion in a continuous integration
environment), (15) tagged releases (considering their frequency, and
availability for end users in terms of binary packages for major
operating systems, or availability via package managers or containers),
(16) no (large-scale) re-implementations for functionality for which
good solutions already exist. Many of these aspects require appropriate

> infrastructure (see page ).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
infrastructure.
```

### Maturity

The research software applying for sustained funding must have already
reached a certain level of maturity (typically class 2 or 3 as defined
by Schlauch et al. (Schlauch, Meinel, and Haupt 2018)). A mandatory
requirement is (17) a comprehensive and up-to-date **software management
plan** (SSI 2019b). The software should (18) be maintainable with an
appropriate amount of resources as detailed in a sustainability section
of the software management plan. The software has (19) a well maintained

> website with a clearly defined **point of contact**. Besides an active

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
website with a clearly defined **point of contact** and a communication channel to inform users about news regarding the software such as new releases. Besides an active
```

user community, sustainable software requires (20) a group of developers
(i.e., definitely **more than 1 developer**) documented, e.g., by
contributions to the code base or participation in documented, public
discussions or issue tracking. Another criterion is (21) whether
potential contributors are invited to participate in a clearly defined
process (e.g., a CONTRIBUTING document). The group of developers should

> have defined a governance model for their project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have defined a governance model for their project and easy ways for users to provide input regarding their needs.
```

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software
> Engineering Consortium to set up *hal9k* on the Consortium’s
> distributed TigHub instance, and organize world-wide access to it via
> the NRSEC-AAI. Going forward, the Consortium’s Research Software Hub -
> a registry and Software Heritage Archive-based long-term repository
> for research software on a national level - ingests *hal9k* releases
> with complete metadata: citation metadata, the *hal9k* provenance
> graph and computational environment information, ORCID iDs, etc. and
> provides its own DOIs for versions under a concept DOI. The community
> reviews all code and documentation changes that are contributed to
> *hal9k* via the central TigHub, and the Hub’s CI system Alfred builds,
> tests, and pushes new releases automatically to the registered
> supercomputing clusters. Especially the community efforts become
> better and more streamlined by the day, as research software

> > development training is now offered as part of most curricula

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Busse, Chourdakis, Druskat, Friedl, Funk, Herrmann, Janosch, Loewe, Löffler, Rack, Reina,
```

> engineers (RSEs) can be any gender.)

Computational analysis of huge data sets, computer-based simulations,
and software technology play a central role for virtually all scientific
breakthroughs of the 21st century. The first “picture” of a black hole
may be the most prominent recent example where astrophysical experiments
and the collection and processing of data had to be complemented with
sophisticated algorithms and software to enable research excellence (The
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019). Similarly, it is
research software that allows us to get a glimpse of the consequences
our actions today have on the climate of tomorrow. However, an
implication of computer-based research is that findings and data can
only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is available and
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open
research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial
research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well

> as the operation of adequate infrastructure. However, a large share of

Author: @HeidiSeibold suggests:

```suggestion
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. A large share of researchers (want to or have to) 
```

> researchers base their research on software that was developed in-house

Author: @HeidiSeibold  suggests:

```suggestion
base their research on non-commercial sofware, often developed in-house or as a community 
```

Author: Changed suggestion accordingly, and will commit.

> or as community effort. Many of these software stacks can not be

Author: @HeidiSeibold  suggests:

```suggestion
effort. Many of these software stacks can not be
```

sustained – often because research software was not a first class
deliverable in a research project and hence remained in a prototype
state, or because of missing incentives and resources to maintain the
software after project funding ended. Another fundamental difference to
industrial software development is that most developers of academic
research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)
never receive training in sustainable software development. In
particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary user of a
software product, there are virtually no incentives to invest in
sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In
combination with most researchers holding only temporary positions, this
results in a highly inefficient system where millions of lines of code
are generated every year that will not be re-used after the termination
of the developer’s position. Part of the problem is the reluctance to
accept research software engineering as an academic profession that
results in a lack of incentives to produce high-quality software:
producing high software quality is resource-demanding, and although the

> San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA (“San Francisco

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA, 2012)
```

> Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012)) demands for a change in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
demands for a change in the
```

> programming language often used in researchonomy. Luckily, the UofA
> runs regular Software Plumbery courses for researchers, including a
> Boa course. Kim takes the course and gains a solid understanding of
> the basics of the Hash shell, version control with Tig, and the basics
> of Boa. She starts writing scripts, which help her a lot with the data
> processing. Unfortunately, Kim’s scripts are quite slow and actually
> break after she installs a newer version of Boa. She visits the weekly
> Code Café organized by her university’s central RSE team. The RSEs not
> only help her update her scripts but also suggest some changes which
> speed up the computation by a factor of 25.  
> During the next meeting with her PhD supervisor, Kim presents her
> collection of scripts. The supervisor encourages Kim to create a Boa
> library from them, as they will be very useful to other
> researchonomists. Thankfully, Kim’s project PI had applied for 3 RSE
> person months in their grant, so the project enlists an RSE from the
> central team. Over the next three months, Kim and the RSE work
> together to build the library, document it, test it, license it under the

> > permissive Comanche license, update the TigHub repository to let

Author: ```suggestion
> permissive Kiowa license, update the TigHub repository to let
```

> others contribute, introduce automated builds for every code change
> via a continuous integration platform, and make the library citable.
> Finally, they release the first major version of the library, named
> *hal9k* and publish it through the university library’s software
> portal, where they get a DOI (Digital Object Identifier) for the
> version as well as a concept DOI for any future versions of the
> library. Working with the RSE, Kim has gained a good understanding of
> some methods in software engineering, and she’s thrilled because this
> also means she’ll be able to get a job with a local tech company once
> her fixed-term contract has run out.  
> Kim passes her PhD - of which *hal9k* is an important part - with
> flying colours, and soon citations to her library start appearing in
> the researchonomic literature. To Kim’s surprise, she also reads a
> blog post about a citizen science maker project which has used *hal9k*
> to process researchonomic data measured in a neighbourhood of her
> hometown. She is invited to give a talk at the local office of Siren,
> a global tech company, which look to adopt *hal9k*, and pay Kim

> > handsomely. So handsomely in fact, that Kim can pay a student

Author: ```suggestion
> a generous speaker honorarium. So generous in fact, that Kim can pay a student
```

recommendations (Katerbow and Feulner 2018) and policies (Scheliga et
al. 2019) exist, they are far from being widely adapted. It is still
somewhat unclear how to translate good research practice into research
software practice, for example in terms of validity and reproducibility,
but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources.

While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

> To make it possible to reproduce computationally supported research, a

Author: @HeidiSeibold suggests

```suggestion
To make software-based research (and with that almost any research)
```

> software that has been used must continue to exist in the first place,

Author: @HeidiSeibold suggests (salvaged from the review comments API after overwriting the first line):

```suggestion
reproducible, the used software must continue to exist. Further it must
```

> but also continue to be usable, understandable, and reproducible in the

Author: @HeidiSeibold suggests:

```suggestion
continue to be usable, understandable, and results return the
```

> evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software

Author: ```suggestion
same results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
```

    identify challenges for research software sustainability for Germany and
    beyond, in terms of motivation, selection, research software engineering
    personnel, funding, infrastructure and legal aspects. We address
    political and academic decision makers to increase awareness of the
    importance and needs of sustainable research software practices. In
    particular, we recommend strategies and measures to create an
    environment for sustainable research software, with the ultimate goal to
    ensure that software-driven research is valid, reproducible and
    sustainable. Software should be recognized as a first class citizen in
    research. This paper is the outcome of two workshops run in Germany in
    2019, at deRSE19 - the first International Conference of Research
    Software Engineers in Germany - and a dedicated DFG-supported follow-up
    workshop in Berlin.
author:
# Main authors (editorial team, alphabetical by last name)
- 'Hartwig Anzt 1,2,†'
- 'Felix Bach 1,†'
- 'Stephan Druskat 3,4,5,†'
- 'Frank Löffler 6,7,8,†'
- 'Axel Loewe 9,*,†'
- 'Bernhard Y. Renard 10,11,†'
- 'Gunnar Seemann 12,13,*,†'
- 'Alexander Struck 14,†'

> # Additional authors (alphabetical by last name)

Reviewer 2: @mukil please add yourself

digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

To make software-based research (and with that almost any research)
reproducible, the used software must continue to exist. Furthermore, it must
continue to be usable, understandable, and results return the
same results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
should support reuse scenarios to avoid duplication of efforts, and

> unneeded drain of resources. If it is publicly funded, it should also be

Author: @bussec suggests:

```suggestion
unneeded drain of resources. Therefore, if research software is publicly
```

> open source and freely accessible.

Author: @bussec suggests:

```suggestion
funded, it should be freely available under an Open Source Software license.
```

Currently, creating and using sustainable research software is not 
sufficiently incentivized. To evaluate where to address this
shortcoming, we have identified the following challenges:

> -   **Lack of benefit for the individual**: The primary motivation for

Author: ```suggestion
**Lack of benefit for the individual**: Currently, the primary motivation for
```

    sustainable research software is the common benefit, rather than the

>     individual benefit. While directing resources towards sustainable

Author: ```suggestion
    individual benefit. While directing resources towards sustainable
```
```suggestion
    iindividual benefit. It is  clearly beneficial for the
```

>     research software may in the short run yield disadvantages for the

Author: ```suggestion
    research community as a whole to direct resources towards sustainable
```

>     developing individual (e.g., fewer paper publications) (Bangerth and

Author: ```suggestion
    research software, as it enables better and more
```

>     Heister 2014; Prins et al. 2015), it is clearly beneficial for the

Author: ```suggestion
    research by freeing funds for actual research rather than
```

>     research community as a whole, as it enables better and more

Author: ```suggestion
    (repetitive) software development. But the developers are often even at a disadvantage
```

>     research by freeing funds for actual research rather than

Author: ```suggestion
    (e.g., they publish less papers, Bangerth and Heister 2014; Prins et al. 2015), which
```

>     (repetitive) software development.

Author: ```suggestion
    in turn prevents sustainable research software.
```

software’s functionality. In light of recent updates to definitions of
good research practice (DFG 2019a), sustainable research software also
allows domain researchers to comply with guidelines and best practices.
Additionally, using a software that is sustainable enough to establish
itself as a standard tool in a field signifies inclusion in a research
community. Less directly, researchers may benefit from the existence of
sustainable standard tools as they yield standard formats, which in
themselves facilitate reuse of research data.

**Research Software Engineers (RSEs)** have an intrinsic interest in
sustainable research software. They create better software for research,
which enables more and better research. RSEs have an inherent interest
in developing and working with high quality software, as part of
professional ethics as well as good research practice. RSEs build their
reputation on high quality software and software citation (Smith et al.
2016; Druskat 2019), which will open up new career paths. Finally, for
RSEs, creating sustainable research software is part of an attractive,
intellectually challenging, and satisfying work environment.

> **Research leaders** as well as **research performing organizations

Author: ```suggestion
**Research leaders** as well as **research performing organizations**
```

> (RPO)** mainly focus on the economic aspects and management of research,

Author: ```suggestion
mainly focus on the economic aspects and management of research,
```

i.e., available funds, people, and time employed to optimize research
output. Both need to make sure that their employees continually improve
their qualification and generate impact to improve their standing in the
various research communities and ensure continued funding. Overseeing
and enabling the creation of sustainable research software advances
their visibility in the field and makes their research endeavors both
more future-proof, and more easily traceable, reproducible, and
verifiable and thus more likely to attract additional resources

> (including human resources). **RPOs** can additionally benefit from

Author: ```suggestion
(including human resources). **Research performing organizations** can additionally benefit from
```

Requirements
------------

Sustainable funding for research software boils down to funding the four
main pillars enabling sustainable software development: i) Personnel
with expertise in research software development; ii) Infrastructure for
developing, testing, validating, and benchmarking research software, and
distributed versioning systems for collaborative software development;
iii) Training in software design and sustainable software development;
and iv) Community events for creating synergies between research groups
and software efforts.

Challenges
----------

Short-term engagement of (young) researchers raises the question of how
to maintain a constant level of expertise within a developer team and
preventing knowledge drain concerning domain knowledge and software
engineering skills. Conversely, the permanent engagement of qualified
personnel requires to offer career perspectives, especially due to the
fact that academia competes with industry for the same people. A
challenge specific to Germany is posed by the shortage of permanent
positions and by the restrictions for temporary positions due to the
German *Wissenschaftszeitvertragsgesetz* (Bundesministerium der Justiz

> und für Verbraucherschutz 2007).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
und für Verbraucherschutz 2016).
```

travel and research visits. Creating a research software community
however requires funding for community and training events as well as
“virtual hardware” such as webspace, versioning systems, task-managing
systems, and compute cycles. These demands can hardly be met without
third-party funding (Kuchinke et al. 2016; Chang, Mills, and Newhouse
2007; Aartsen et al. 2018; Gabella, Durinx, and Appel 2018).

Recommendation: Creation of Adequate Funding Schemes
----------------------------------------------------

Funding is a crucial factor for sustaining research software. Currently
available sources and instruments are not adequately shaped for the
challenges and solutions outlined above. We recommend actions on the
individual, organizational, and national level.

Existing project-focused funding instruments on the local, national, and
international level need to be complemented with funding instruments
specifically designed for research software development and sustained
research software maintenance to make research software a first class
citizen in the research landscape. For example, software projects
enhancing research and fulfilling the sustainability criteria detailed

> in section  on p.  may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
above may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they
```

research software development as a process to analyze which measures,
interactions, and team compositions make research software successful.
Additionally, funding instruments fostering the formation of research
software communities have to be established.

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software
> Engineering Consortium to set up *hal9k* on the Consortium’s
> distributed TigHub instance, and organize world-wide access to it via
> the NRSEC-AAI. Going forward, the Consortium’s Research Software Hub -
> a registry and Software Heritage Archive-based long-term repository
> for research software on a national level - ingests *hal9k* releases
> with complete metadata: citation metadata, the *hal9k* provenance
> graph and computational environment information, ORCID iDs, etc. and
> provides its own DOIs for versions under a concept DOI. The community
> reviews all code and documentation changes that are contributed to

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> > *hal9k* via the centra

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Morin, Andrew, Jennifer Urban, and Piotr Sliz. 2012. “A Quick Guide to
```

correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

To make software-based research (and with that almost any research)
reproducible, the used software must continue to exist. Furthermore, it must
continue to be usable, understandable, and results return the
same results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the
evolving software and hardware environment. Moreover, the software
should support reuse scenarios to avoid duplication of efforts, and
unneeded drain of resources. Therefore, if research software is publicly
funded, it should be freely available under an Open Source Software license.

Currently, creating and using sustainable research software is not 
sufficiently incentivized. To evaluate where to address this
shortcoming, we have identified the following challenges:

> **Lack of benefit for the individual**: Currently, the primary motivation for

Author: ```suggestion
-   **Lack of benefit for the individual**: Currently, the primary motivation for
```

    sustainable research software is the common benefit, rather than the
    individual benefit. It is  clearly beneficial for the
    research community as a whole to direct resources towards sustainable
    research software, as it enables better and more
    research by freeing funds for domain research rather than
    (repetitive) software development. But the developers are often even at a disadvantage
    (e.g., they publish less papers, Bangerth and Heister 2014; Prins et al. 2015), which
    in turn prevents sustainable research software.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

-   **Lack of suitable incentive systems**: Contributions to research
    that are not traditional text-based products (i.e., papers or
    monographs) are still not sufficiently awarded, or not awarded at
    all, mainly due to the missing implementation of mandatory software
    citation  (Smith et al. 2016; Hafer and Kirkpatrick 2009; Howison
    and Bullard 2016; Li, Yan, and Feng 2017; Li, Chen, and Yan 2019;
    Park and Wolfram 2019; Pan et al. 2019; Doerr et al. 2019; Druskat
    2019; Katz, Bouquin, et al. 2019).

```

    benefit for the research community. This exceeds the implementation
    of research software citation (which is work in progress (Smith et
    al. 2016; Li, Lin, and Greenberg 2016; Katz, Bouquin, et al. 2019;
    Druskat 2019)), and pertains to sustainability and policy studies.

-   **Infrastructure issues**: Due to a lack of knowledge about how
    sustainability features impact the application of research software,
    there is not yet enough evidence for whether centralized or
    decentralized facilities should be favored to further research
    software sustainability (Kuchinke et al. 2016; Loewe et al. 2019).
    This in turn leads to a lack of infrastructure as a whole. 

-   **Legal issues**: Many obstacles for research software pertain to
    legal issues, such as applicable licensing (Morin, Urban, and Sliz
    2012), and decisions about license types.

-   **Funding issues**: Despite some individual initiatives (Katz and
    Ramnath 2015; DFG 2016, 2019b; Chan Zuckerberg Initiative n.d.),
    funding for the creation, maintenance, and support of sustainable
    research software is still scarce.

> -   **Lack of suitable incentive systems**: Contributions to research

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     that are not traditional text-based products (i.e., papers or

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     monographs) are still not sufficiently awarded, or not awarded at

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     all, mainly due to the missing implementation of mandatory software

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     citation  (Smith et al. 2016; Hafer and Kirkpatrick 2009; Howison

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     and Bullard 2016; Li, Yan, and Feng 2017; Li, Chen, and Yan 2019;

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     Park and Wolfram 2019; Pan et al. 2019; Doerr et al. 2019; Druskat

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     2019; Katz, Bouquin, et al. 2019).

Author: ```suggestion
```

support easier. Additionally, they can position themselves at the
forefront of research by bundling expertise on the creation and
maintenance of sustainable research software and installing research
software engineering teams.

**Research funding organizations** have inherent interest in – and
directly benefit from – the existence of sustainable research software
as it allows them to direct more resources towards other research topics
and increase return on investment. At the same time, funding
organizations can create incentives for sustainable software by imposing
policies that reflect the necessity of research software sustainability
and creating respective funding opportunities.

**Industry** benefits from sustainable research software, as the process
of creating and maintaining research software produces a highly-skilled
workforce. Depending on the employed licensing model, sustainable
research software can also be adopted by industry partners to reduce
cost in corporate research and development. Helping to sustain research
software may also enable positive outreach for companies across industry
and into society.

> **Open source developers** can get involved in research software, even if they 

Author: ```suggestion
**Independent (open source) developers** can get involved in research software, even if they 
```

> several publications in software and paper form, as well as having
> attracted funding, Kim finds herself looking for a job again.

Research relies on software and software relies on the people developing
and maintaining it. Sustainable research requires sustainable software,
and this in turn requires continuity for those who develop and maintain
it.

Requirements
------------

Possibly the most important demand is the need for an increase in
**recognition and awareness** of research software as a first class
citizen in research (Akhmerov, Cruz, Drost, Hof, Knapen, Kuzak,
Martinez-Ortiz, et al. 2019; Chue Hong 2019; Scheliga et al. 2019). For
sustainability of research software, long-term commitments of the
respective software leads are crucial, but no **professional RSE
profiles** currently exist. In consequence, it is essential to create
career paths for research software engineers (RSEs) that are attractive
and include permanency. While creating permanent positions in the German
academic system below the faculty level is an actively discussed topic
overall (Vereinigung der Kanzlerinnen und Kanzler der Universitäten

> Deutschlands 2019), we specifically focus on the needs stemming from the

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Deutschlands 2019), we specifically focus on the needs originating from the
```

development and maintenance of research software here.

As already mentioned, research software development not only requires
domain expertise, but also software development **education, skills, and
competencies**. Currently, most of the domain researchers developing and
maintaining domain-specific software technology never received
professional training on software development (Wilson et al. 2014;
Philippe et al. 2019). To enhance the productivity and sustainability of
computer-based research, it is essential to integrate software
development training into the education of domain researchers.

Currently, a significant portion of the existing research software is
developed by individuals or in small groups, primarily to serve their
own requirements. This situation is unsatisfying in terms of
collaboration and inefficient in terms of several groups spending
resources on generating similar or even the same functionality. To
enable and promote synergies, it is important to allocate resources for
research software development and to build **communities**, as described
in (Katz et al. 2019).

Challenges
----------

We are currently facing a **lack of awareness** for the importance of

> research software as discussed in the section on p. . Moreover, there is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
research software as discussed above. Moreover, there is
```

on volunteers. This is challenging, because despite benefits to domain
science, volunteers hardly receive recognition for their work “back
home”, i.e., within their domain, underlining again the importance of
our first demand.

Recommendations
---------------

Increasing **recognition and awareness** is a challenge that calls for
both immediate action and perseverance. Nevertheless, some measures will
likely show positive effects comparatively soon:

Similarly to plans for research data management, funding agencies should
request that applicants include considerations about how software
developed in a project can be sustained beyond the end of the funded
project. A follow up on these plans during and after the project
lifetime, i.e., a dedicated software management plan, is crucial.

Another recommendation is aimed at decision makers concerning
recruitment for academic positions: broaden the definition of research
impact beyond traditional scientific publications to also include other
impactful results. Not all researchers thinking of themselves as RSEs
pursue a faculty position as their main career goal. However, permanent

> non-professorial academic faculty positions are rare within the German

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
non-professorial academic faculty positions or in general permanent team leader positions are rare within the German
```

Reviewer 2: I guess the point behind this comment is that not all RSEs would consider themself "non-professorial academic faculty"?. Agreed. But: should all permanent RSEs be team leaders?

Reviewer 6: I agree, this is awkward. See my other change request.

“virtual hardware” such as webspace, versioning systems, task-managing
systems, and compute cycles. These demands can hardly be met without
third-party funding (Kuchinke et al. 2016; Chang, Mills, and Newhouse
2007; Aartsen et al. 2018; Gabella, Durinx, and Appel 2018).

Recommendation: Creation of Adequate Funding Schemes
----------------------------------------------------

Funding is a crucial factor for sustaining research software. Currently
available sources and instruments are not adequately shaped for the
challenges and solutions outlined above. We recommend actions on the
individual, organizational, and national level.

Existing project-focused funding instruments on the local, national, and
international level need to be complemented with funding instruments
specifically designed for research software development and sustained
research software maintenance to make research software a first class
citizen in the research landscape. For example, software projects
enhancing research and fulfilling the sustainability criteria detailed
above may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they
live up to the standards and remain a central component of the research
landscape.

> University computing centers and supercomputing facilities need to

Author: ```suggestion
Computing centers and supercomputing facilities for research need to
```

software, as well as personnel for training domain researchers in
software design and the proper usage of the services.

The creation and maintenance of training material for general research
software engineering education and the software-specific documentation
and tutorial creation needs to be reflected in funding opportunities.
This can either happen by dedicating modules of research or software
grants to providing support and the generation of training material, or
by opening funding schemes focusing on interdisciplinary software
development education. The latter may include research that looks at
research software development as a process to analyze which measures,
interactions, and team compositions make research software successful.
Additionally, funding instruments fostering the formation of research
software communities have to be established.

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software
> Engineering Consortium to set up *hal9k* on the Consortium’s

> > distributed TigHub instanc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(see above for details).
```

> > distributed TigHub instanc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are certainly challenging.
```

in (Katz et al. 2019).

Challenges
----------

We are currently facing a **lack of awareness** for the importance of
research software as discussed above. Moreover, there is
**little recognition** for the efforts put into software development and
maintenance. In consequence, software development in academic settings
is mostly considered as a means to an end and sustainability is often
not considered in project planning and grant proposals and contributes
little to progressing research careers (Science Guide 2019; “San
Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012). The main challenge
here is the continued use of metrics that primarily leverage
traditionally published articles and article citation numbers.

In academia, developers of research software are typically domain
researchers, and in particular if new areas are explored, the software
development process itself has research character. Obviously, developing
research software requires not only domain knowledge but also software
development skills, and the researchers leading the software development
process are often domain experts with substantial software development

> experience. However, the current academic system in Germany does not

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
experience, making them extremely valuable members of the research community. However, the current academic system in Germany does not
```

on volunteers. This is challenging, because despite benefits to domain
science, volunteers hardly receive recognition for their work “back
home”, i.e., within their domain, underlining again the importance of
our first demand.

Recommendations
---------------

Increasing **recognition and awareness** is a challenge that calls for
both immediate action and perseverance. Nevertheless, some measures will
likely show positive effects comparatively soon:

Similarly to plans for research data management, funding agencies should
request that applicants include considerations about how software
developed in a project can be sustained beyond the end of the funded
project. A follow up on these plans during and after the project
lifetime, i.e., a dedicated software management plan, is crucial.

Another recommendation is aimed at decision makers concerning
recruitment for academic positions: broaden the definition of research
impact beyond traditional scientific publications to also include other
impactful results. Not all researchers thinking of themselves as RSEs
pursue a faculty position as their main career goal. However, permanent

> non-professorial academic faculty positions are rare within the German

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
academic non-faculty positions are rare within the German
```

Reviewer 6: What should be meant here is permanent, academic positions other than a professorship (faculty).

software, as well as personnel for training domain researchers in
software design and the proper usage of the services.

The creation and maintenance of training material for general research
software engineering education and the software-specific documentation
and tutorial creation needs to be reflected in funding opportunities.
This can either happen by dedicating modules of research or software
grants to providing support and the generation of training material, or
by opening funding schemes focusing on interdisciplinary software
development education. The latter may include research that looks at
research software development as a process to analyze which measures,
interactions, and team compositions make research software successful.
Additionally, funding instruments fostering the formation of research
software communities have to be established.

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software
> Engineering Consortium to set up *hal9k* on the Consortium’s

> > distributed Ti

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bundesministerium der Justiz und für Verbraucherschutz. 2017. “Gesetz
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Furthermore we recommend establishing masters degrees in research software engineering.

```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> graph and computational environment information,  OCRIDs, etc. and
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> provides its own IDs for versions under a concept ID. The community
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
background, which leverage research results. Besides the
```

Changed 'exploit' to 'leverage' because while technically neutral, 'exploit' does have a negative tone to it which we should avoid here.

I do not think whether or not the research was paid with taxes is the main point here. Commercial solutions exist, quite large and well-used ones. They of course have a business plan. Their solutions wouldn't be sustainable without. I would not go into a discussion which of these plans is 'good' and which is not, not in this paper, aside from obvious "bad" ones. What we can argue about is which solutions are useful for research software. All the ones mentioned here I think can be recommended based on that.

    2019, at deRSE19 - the first International Conference of Research
    Software Engineers in Germany - and a dedicated DFG-supported follow-up
    workshop in Berlin.
author:
# Main authors (editorial team, alphabetical by last name)
- 'Hartwig Anzt 1,2,†'
- 'Felix Bach 1,†'
- 'Stephan Druskat 3,4,5,†'
- 'Frank Löffler 6,7,8,†'
- 'Axel Loewe 9,*,†'
- 'Bernhard Y. Renard 10,11,†'
- 'Gunnar Seemann 12,13,*,†'
- 'Alexander Struck 14,†'
# Additional authors (alphabetical by last name)
- 'Elke Achhammer 15'
- 'Piush Aggarwal 16'
- 'Franziska Appel 17'
- 'Michael Bader 18'
- 'Lutz Brusch 19'
- 'Christian Busse 46'
- 'Gerasimos Chourdakis 47'
- 'Peter Ebert 20'
- 'Bernd Flemisch 21'
- 'Sven Friedl 22'
- 'Maximilian D. Funk 23'
- 'Florian Goth 24'
- 'Jean-Noël Grad 25'
- 'Sibylle Hermann 26'
- 'Florian Hohmann 27'
- 'Stephan Janosch 45'
- 'Dominik Kutra 28'
- 'Jan Linxweiler 29'
- 'Thilo Muth 10,30'
- 'Wolfgang Peters-Kottig 31'
- 'Fabian Rack 32'
- 'Fabian H.C. Raters 33'
- 'Stephan Rave 34'
- 'Guido Reina 35'
- 'Timo Ropinski 36,37'
- 'Joerg Schaarschmidt 38'
- 'Heidi Seibold 42, 43, 44'
- 'Jan P. Thiele 39'
- 'Benjamin Uekerman 40'
- 'Stefan Unger 41'

> - 'Rudolf Weeber 25'

Author: ```suggestion
- 'Rudolf Weeber 25'
 'Piotr Wojciech Dabrowski 45'
```

From #6

30. eScience Division, Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, Berlin, Germany and 
31. Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum für Informationstechnik Berlin (ZIB), Germany and 
32. FIZ Karlsruhe - Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructure, Germany and
33. Department of Economics, University of Goettingen, Germany and 
34. Applied Mathematics, University of Münster, Germany and
35. Visualization Research Center, University of Stuttgart, Germany and 
36. Institute of Media Informatics, Ulm University, Germany and
37. Department of Science and Technology, Linköping University, Sweden and 
38. Institute of Nanotechnology, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany and 
39. Institute of Applied Mathematics, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany and 
40. Energy Technology, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands and 
41. Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, Quedlinburg, Germany and
42. LMU Munich, Germany and
43. Bielefeld University, Germany and
44. Helmholtz Zentrum München, Germany
45. Max Planck Institue of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany
46. Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany

> 47. Chair of Scientific Computing in Computer Science, Technical University Munich, Germany

Author: ```suggestion
47. Chair of Scientific Computing in Computer Science, Technical University Munich, Germany and
48. School of Computing, Communication and Business, Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft Berlin, Germany
```

From #6

- * axel.loewe@kit.edu, gunnar.seemann@universitaets-herzzentrum.de
- † Contributed equally
bibliography: 'references.bib'
title: |
    An Environment for Sustainable Research Software in Germany and Beyond:
    Current State, Open Challenges, and Call for Action
---

Sustainable Software Development; Academic Software; Software
Infrastructure; Software Training; Software Licensing; Research Software

Background
==========

> Meet Kim, who is currently a post-grad PhD student in researchonomy at

> > the University of Arcadia. We will follow Kim’s fictional career in

Author: ```suggestion
> the University of Arcadia (UofA). We will follow Kim’s fictional career in
```

From #7

breakthroughs of the 21st century. The first “picture” of a black hole
may be the most prominent recent example where astrophysical experiments
and the collection and processing of data had to be complemented with
sophisticated algorithms and software to enable research excellence (The
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019). Similarly, it is
research software that allows us to get a glimpse of the consequences
our actions today have on the climate of tomorrow. However, an
implication of computer-based research is that findings and data can
only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is available and
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open
research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial
research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. A large share of researchers (want to or have to) 
base their research on software that is often developed in-house or as a community

> effort. Many of these software stacks can not be

Author: ```suggestion
effort. This can be due to a newly developed algorithm
and the resulting software being at least part of the research work itself,
or due to a highly dynamic field of research with diverse research questions
requiring specialized and quickly adapting software solutions that do not
offer sufficient financial incentives for commercial software solutions to
be developed, or due to disadvantages of commercial software outweighting
its advantages in the specific use case (e.g. prohibitive license costs,
proprietary not publically documented algorithms or export restrictions).
This need of custom in-house or community software development notwithstanding,
the approach brings its own significant challenges: Many of these software stacks can not be
```

From #6

research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)
never receive training in sustainable software development or consider themselves professional software developers (cite survey here). In
particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary user of a
software product, there are no strong incentives to invest in
sustainability measures such as code documentation or portability. In
combination with most researchers holding only temporary positions, this
results in a highly inefficient system where millions of lines of code
are generated every year that will not be re-used after the termination
of the developer’s position. Part of the problem is the reluctance to
accept research software engineering as an academic profession that
results in a lack of incentives to produce high-quality software:
producing high software quality is resource-demanding, and although the
San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment (DORA, 2012)
demands for a change in the
academic credit system, many institutions base promotion and
appointments on traditional metrics like the Hirsch index (Hirsch 2005).
It is obvious that an extraordinary amount of idealism is required to

> write a sustainable code including documentation and installation

Author: ```suggestion
write sustainable code including documentation and installation
```

From #6

software engineers (RSEs) in Germany, where funding bodies increasingly
acknowledge the importance and value of sustainable research software
infrastructures. The German Research Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG), the largest funding body for basic
research in Germany, for example, has opened a call for sustainable
research software development (DFG 2016) at the end of 2016 and a second
call for quality management in research software (DFG 2019b) in June
2019. We note that the first call was oversubscribed by a factor of
10-15, a strong indicator of unmet demand. As another example, the 2019
“Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice” Code of Conduct of
the DFG (DFG 2019a) now explicitly list software side by side with
research results and data. The FAIR principles for research
data (Wilkinson et al. 2016) provide guidelines for data archiving, but
enabling full reproducibility and traceability of research software
requires additional steps (Hasselbring et al. 2019). In consequence,
there are ongoing discussions whether software should be considered as a
specific kind of research data or as a separate entity (Lamprecht et al.
2019).  

> Unfortunately, guidelines and policies for sustainable research software

Author: ```suggestion
These positive developments notwithstanding, guidelines and policies for sustainable research software
```

From #6

> development in Germany are still lacking and long-term funding

Author: ```suggestion
development in Germany are unfortunately still lacking and long-term funding
```

From #6

development. We as a community work hard on overcoming the challenges of
software development in an academic setting, but need support and in
particular reliable funding options and institutional recognition for
the sake of better research.

Why Sustainable Research Software in the First Place?
=====================================================

> After graduation, Kim joins a fixed-term researchonomical research
> project. For her PhD thesis, she wants to crunch some data. Her
> colleague recommends to learn some Boa, which is an all-purpose
> programming language often used in researchonomy. Luckily, the UofA
> runs regular Software Plumbery courses for researchers, including a
> Boa course. Kim takes the course and gains a solid understanding of
> the basics of the Hash shell, version control with Tig, and the basics
> of Boa. She starts writing scripts, which help her a lot with the data
> processing. Unfortunately, Kim’s scripts are quite slow and actually
> break after she installs a newer version of Boa. She visits the weekly
> Code Café organized by her university’s central RSE team. The RSEs not
> only help her update her scripts but also suggest some changes which

> > speed up the computation by a factor of 25.  

Author: ```suggestion
> actually speed up processing by a factor of 25.  
```

From #6

> some methods in software engineering, and she’s thrilled because this
> also means she’ll be able to get a job with a local tech company once
> her fixed-term contract has run out.  
> Kim passes her PhD - of which *hal9k* is an important part - with
> flying colours, and soon citations to her library start appearing in
> the researchonomic literature. To Kim’s surprise, she also reads a
> blog post about a citizen science maker project which has used *hal9k*
> to process researchonomic data measured in a neighbourhood of her
> hometown. She is invited to give a talk at the local office of Siren,
> a global tech company, which look to adopt *hal9k*, and pay Kim
> a generous speaker honorarium. So generous in fact, that Kim can pay a student
> assistant for a full year from the money.

Our credibility as researchers in society hinges on the notion of proper
research conduct, also known as “good research practice”. The
digitalization of research has introduced complex digital research
outputs, such as software and data sets. Although first
recommendations (Katerbow and Feulner 2018) and policies (Scheliga et
al. 2019) exist, they are far from being widely adapted. It is still

> somewhat unclear how to translate good research practice into research

Author: ```suggestion
somewhat unclear how to translate good research practice into good research
```

From #6

software practice, for example in terms of validity and reproducibility,

> but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources.

Author: ```suggestion
but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources. The damage
that failing to do is causing both to the progress of the research community
and to the credibility of science in society is becoming increasingly clear
with the growth of the replication crisis - while the lack of universally
agreed-upon and supported good research software practice is not the main
reason for that crisis, it clearly is a contributing factor.
```

From #6

> While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable

Author: ```suggestion
While it is thus obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
```

From #6

digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

> To make software-based research (and with that almost any research)

Author: ```suggestion
To make it possible to reproduce computationally supported research, a
```

From #6

> reproducible, the used software must continue to exist. Furthermore, it must

Author: ```suggestion
software that has been used must continue to exist in the first place,
```

From #6

    Software Engineering are not widely available (with the notable
    exception of the CodeRefinery project (The CodeRefinery Project
    n.d.)). Targeted curricula must be developed and updated regularly,
    and specialized instructors need to be trained.

-   **Lack of impact measures**: It is unclear how to measure the impact
    of research software with respect to its quality, reusability, and
    benefit for the research community. This exceeds the implementation
    of research software citation (which is work in progress (Smith et
    al. 2016; Li, Lin, and Greenberg 2016; Katz, Bouquin, et al. 2019;
    Druskat 2019)), and pertains to sustainability and policy studies.

-   **Infrastructure issues**: Due to a lack of knowledge about how
    sustainability features impact the application of research software,
    there is not yet enough evidence for whether centralized or
    decentralized facilities should be favored to further research
    software sustainability (Kuchinke et al. 2016; Loewe et al. 2019).
    This in turn leads to a lack of infrastructure as a whole. 

-   **Legal issues**: Many obstacles for research software pertain to

>     legal issues, such as applicable licensing (Morin, Urban, and Sliz

Author: ```suggestion
    legal issues, such as applicable licensing  and compatibility of licenses (Morin, Urban, and Sliz
```

From #6

    2012), and decisions about license types.

-   **Funding issues**: Despite some individual initiatives (Katz and
    Ramnath 2015; DFG 2016, 2019b; Chan Zuckerberg Initiative n.d.),
    funding for the creation, maintenance, and support of sustainable
    research software is still scarce.

> -   **Slow adoption of Research Software Engineers as a profession**:

Author: ```suggestion
-   **Slow adoption of Research Software Engineering as a profession**:
```

From #6

and the implementation of sustainable research software policy and
practice.

**Geopolitical units** have a strategic interest to be independent of
other geopolitical units to ensure that research can continue seamlessly
regardless of geopolitical developments and ensuing embargoes on
information flow. Reuse of sustainable software additionally frees up
funding for uses other than software development. Well-established,
sustainable software systems can also attract researchers and companies
in the research and technology sector.

**Libraries (also registries, indices)** benefit from sustainable
research software, as it will undergo a formal publishing process and be
properly described in its metadata. Libraries can extend their portfolio
beyond text-based research objects and stake claims as organizations
harnessing the digitalization of research. In turn, they help to
increase visibility and discoverability for research software through
their services and advance the competitiveness of their organization or
geopolitical unit. In addition, libraries also use research software and
would thus benefit directly from a more sustainable research software

> landscape. In addition, by using free and open source research software,

Author: ```suggestion
landscape. Last but not least, by using free and open source research software,
```

From #6

are not employed by a research institution. This can help them get in contact with
other developers in the field, and may potentially lead to collaborations or job opportunities in research based on this extended experience.

How to Decide Which Software to Sustain?
========================================

> Kim’s PI is happy, because Kim writes a longer section on *hal9k* for
> the final project report and provides a software management plan
> alongside it, which ticks off a box in the template that the PI had
> previously worried about. The PI does not want to let Kim go and
> instead offers her to be co-PI on a follow-up project to test new
> methods on the data, and integrate them into *hal9k* as well. They are
> positive that such a project proposal has a good chance to be funded,
> as they can show impact of their first project via their university’s
> current research information system (CRIS) and through the number of
> citations of *hal9k* and the publications for which it was used. While
> they write the proposal, the faculty dean approaches the two to tell
> them that based on Kim’s work, they will now negotiate about two new

> > members for the central RSE team with the university’s provost for research

Author: ```suggestion
> RSEs for the central RSE team with the university’s provost for research
```

From #6

> methods, as well as the significant reuse potential of *hal9k* for the
> researchonomic community as a direct effect of its well-engineered
> architecture and modularity. Additionally, they stress that it was
> really easy to evaluate the software due to the comprehensive test
> suite, documentation, and example data. In fact, during the first
> month of the new project, three other researchonomic research projects
> approach them to ask whether they can contribute to Kim’s library and
> offer to fund six months of RSE work for this. Kim uses this money to
> also parallelize *hal9k* together with the RSEs and works with her
> university’s computing center to offer it as a standard tool for
> researchonomic supercomputing.

Requirements and Challenges
---------------------------

Sustainability of research software should be considered from the
beginning on for new projects. The criteria listed below, or a subset
such as the “good enough” practices proposed by Wilson et al. (Wilson et
al. 2017), are valuable throughout the development process (including
early phases) for almost all types of research software applications.

> “Classical” research funding schemes, should acknowledge the need to

Author: ```suggestion
“Classical” research funding schemes should acknowledge the need to
```

From #6

eventually become counterproductive to the efficiency of the research
community. Therefore, it is important to agree on a list of transparent
criteria that qualify a software product for sustained funding. We
recognize that defining research software engineering criteria for
software evaluation will also lead to activities aiming at optimizing
scores to achieve these criteria. Hence, the criteria have to be
designed such that all score-pushing effort truly advances the value of
the software. Criteria that can be manipulated without effectively
adding value, i.e., wasting resources, should be excluded. The list of
criteria presented in this chapter could be the basis for a structured
review process that facilitates an unbiased evaluation of software tools
from various fields. Therefore, this list must be general enough to be
applied to research software from various research disciplines while
also respecting differences between fields (e.g. citation rates between
humanities and life sciences). The challenge to do justice to a wide
spectrum is e.g. reflected by suggesting criteria comprising different
levels (Hong 2014). Interestingly, one third of research software

> repositories have a lifespan less than one day (median: 15

Author: ```suggestion
repositories have a lifespan (defined as the time from the first time
```

From #6

> days, Hasselbring et al. 2019) indicating that many codes are only made

Author: ```suggestion
any code was uploaded to the last contribution) of less than one day (median: 15
days) (Hasselbring et al. 2019) indicating that many codes are only made
```

From #6

> available publicly (as increasingly encouraged or required by

Author: ```suggestion
available publicly for the publication in a journal (as increasingly encouraged or required by
```

From #6

journals (Resnik et al. 2019) and associated with higher

> impact (Vandewalle 2012)) but are not maintained. One of the major

Author: ```suggestion
impact (Vandewalle 2012)) but are not maintained thereafter. One of the major
```

From #6

challenges in the endeavor to define a selection scheme for sustainable
funding of research software is to organize a fair and transparent
review process. We believe that it is important that the review process
is conducted by experts, or teams of experts, that have a strong

> background both on software engineering as well on the domain-specific

Author: ```suggestion
background both on software engineering as well as on the domain-specific
```

From #6

about additional challenges (Li, Chen, and Yan 2019). Therefore, other,
potentially domain-specific, impact measures, such as influence on
policy and practice as well as use in other software and products should
be considered as well to evaluate relevance for academia and society.
Considerable attendance at training and networking events can be
considered as a proof of use as well. (4) A **market analysis** needs to
show that the software is important to a user base of relevant size and
either unique or one of the main players in a field with several
existing solutions. Geographical or political aspects can be considered
as well, e.g. to support the maintenance of a European solution. A
convergence process of (parts of) a research community towards a
specific software stack, i.e. documented transition of several research
groups to a common software, would be a strong indicator of impact.
(5) As community benefits are a central goal of sustained software
funding, outreach and **appropriate training material** for new users of
the software are essential.

### Software Quality

As mandatory criteria of software quality that have to be fulfilled, we

> consider (6) the **public availability of the source code** in both a 

Author: ```suggestion
consider (6) the **public availability of the source code**, with
```

From #6

> code repository and an archive (for long term availability), 

Author: ```suggestion
```

From #6

> developed using

Author: ```suggestion
```

From #6

> (7) **version control** with meaningful commit messages and linked to an issue tracker (ideally maintained, but at least mirrored on a public platform)

Author: ```suggestion
(7) **version control** (ideally on a public platform)
```

From #6

(8) **Documentation** of the software needs to be publicly available
comprising both user documentation (requirements, installation, getting

> started, user manual, release notes) and developer documentation (with a development guide and API documentation within the

Author: ```suggestion
started, user manual) and developer documentation (ideally within the
```

From #6

code, e.g. using Doxygen) (Lee 2018). (9) The **license** under which

> the software is distributed must be defined. Publicly funded software

Author: ```suggestion
the software is distributed must be defined and ensure public code
availability and free use, at least for academic purposes.
```

From #6

> should be published under a Free and Open Source Software license

Author: ```suggestion
```

From #6

> by default, although exceptions to this might apply (e.g., excluding commercial use).

Author: ```suggestion
```

From #6

(10) **Dependencies** on libraries and technologies must be defined.

We acknowledge that some additional criteria have to be evaluated under
consideration of the research domain. These comprise (11) the
availability of examples (comprising input data and reference results),
(12) mechanisms for extensibility (software modularity) as one aspect of
software architecture (Venters et al. 2018) and (13) interoperability

> (APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) testing

Author: ```suggestion
(APIs / common and open data formats for input and output), (14) a test suite
```

From https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/4

> infrastructure including but not strictly requiring unit tests,

Author: ```suggestion
(including at least some of the following: unit tests, regression tests,
```

> performance tests, regression tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests

Author: ```suggestion
integration tests, end-to-end tests, performance tests; ideally run in an
```

From #4

> (ideally run in an automated fashion in a continuous integration

Author: ```suggestion
automated fashion in a continuous integration environment),
```

> environment), (15) tagged releases (considering their frequency, and

Author: ```suggestion
(15) tagged releases (considering their frequency, and
```

From #4

not considered in project planning and grant proposals and contributes
little to progressing research careers (Science Guide 2019; “San
Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment” 2012). The main challenge
here is the continued use of metrics that primarily leverage
traditionally published articles and article citation numbers.

In academia, developers of research software are typically domain
researchers, and in particular if new areas are explored, the software
development process itself has research character. Obviously, developing
research software requires not only domain knowledge but also software
development skills, and the researchers leading the software development
process are often domain experts with substantial software development
experience, making them extremely valuable members of the research community. However, the current academic system in Germany does not
provide a defined **RSE role**. Limited-term positions are, at least
currently within the main German academic system, often effectively the
end of their career path, sometimes even a dead end. The challenge here
is the lack of available permanent positions within the non-professorial

> academic faculty (“Mittelbau”) in Germany, as well as the already

Author: ```suggestion
academic faculty (“Mittelbau”) in Germany, compounded by a lack of access to 
these few permanent positions for research software engineers due to the already
```

From #6

> straight into a long-term position at her institute, where they focus
> on the maintenance and development of *hal9k*, work with the computing
> center to support *hal9k*-based supercomputing on a new, dedicated
> FGPA cluster, develop training materials for external users, and
> organize the yearly *hal9k* users and developers conference. Kim gets
> to travel the world to visit researchonomics groups who are using
> *hal9k*.

Requirements
------------

Sustainable funding for research software boils down to funding the four
main pillars enabling sustainable software development: i) Personnel
with expertise in research software development; ii) Infrastructure for
developing, testing, validating, and benchmarking research software, and
distributed versioning systems for collaborative software development;
iii) Training in software design and sustainable software development;
and iv) Community management and events for creating synergies between research groups
and software efforts.

Challenges
----------

Short-term engagement of (young) researchers raises the question of how
to maintain a constant level of expertise within a developer team and

> preventing knowledge drain concerning domain knowledge and software

Author: ```suggestion
prevent knowledge drain concerning domain knowledge and software
```

From #6

available sources and instruments are not adequately shaped for the
challenges and solutions outlined above. We recommend actions on the
individual, organizational, and national level.

Existing project-focused funding instruments on the local, national, and
international level need to be complemented with funding instruments
specifically designed for research software development and sustained
research software maintenance to make research software a first class
citizen in the research landscape. For example, software projects
enhancing research and fulfilling the sustainability criteria detailed
above may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they
live up to the standards and remain a central component of the research
landscape.

Computing centers and supercomputing facilities for research need to
receive earmarked resources for the support of sustainable software
development. This funding is necessary to provide continuous integration
services, a hardware portfolio for development, testing and benchmarking
software, as well as personnel for training domain researchers in
software design and the proper usage of the services.

> The creation and maintenance of training material for general research

Author: ```suggestion
The creation and maintenance of training materials for general research
```

From #6

software engineering education and the software-specific documentation
and tutorial creation needs to be reflected in funding opportunities.
This can either happen by dedicating modules of research or software
grants to providing support and the generation of training material, or
by opening funding schemes focusing on interdisciplinary software
development education. The latter may include research that looks at
research software development as a process to analyze which measures,
interactions, and team compositions make research software successful.
Additionally, funding instruments fostering the formation of research
software communities have to be established.

Which Infrastructure is Needed to Sustain Research Software?
============================================================

> As the *hal9k* community grows, so does the need for infrastructure.
> Kim and her team collaborate with the National Research Software

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> graph and computational environment information, ORCIDs, etc. and
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> provides its own IDs for versions under a concept ID. The community
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
background, which leverage research results. Besides the
```

Changed 'exploit' to 'leverage' because while technically neutral, 'exploit' does have a negative tone to it which we should avoid here.

I do not think whether or not the research was paid with taxes is the main point here. Commercial solutions exist, quite large and well-used ones. They of course have a business plan. Their solutions wouldn't be sustainable without. I would not go into a discussion which of these plans is 'good' and which is not, not in this paper, aside from obvious "bad" ones. What we can argue about is which solutions are useful for research software. All the ones mentioned here I think can be recommended based on that.

Reviewer 7: I observed the same phenomenon. Maybe we should discuss our tool chain in the end...

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
registration of all research software efforts with an ID
```

> > Engineering Consortium to

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
and developing a tool that allows to explore the research software
```

> > Kim and her team collaborate with 

Author: ```suggestion
landscape. While some funding for such tools and software repositories is
emerging (e.g. the bio.tools catalogue of bioinformatics tools funded
as part of the European ELIXIR project, Ison, Rapacki, Ménager et al., 
2015), a standardized extension of such efforts to the RSE community as
a whole is necessary. However, as the experiences from ELIXIR
demonstrate, this is a non-trivial effort that requires significant dedicated
and long-term funding. 
```

From #6

Author: TODO Add reference to Overleaf.

Jon Ison, Kristoffer Rapacki, Hervé Ménager, Matúš Kalaš, Emil Rydza, 
Piotr Chmura, Christian Anthon, Niall Beard, Karel Berka, et al. 2015.
“Tools and data services registry: a community effort to document 
bioinformatics resources” *Nucleic Acids Research* 44 (January): D38-D47.

Reviewer 2: Added with citekey ison2016tools

> > Kim and her team collaborate with 

Author: ```suggestion
provided under certain licenses and their conditions must be observed 
(which, due to incompatibilities even among open source software licenses,
may well mean that individually reuseable pieces of software cannot be 
reused together or in a new context).
```

From #6

> > Kim and her team collaborate with 

Author: ```suggestion
the Data Science Academy [HIDA](https:\\www.helmholtz-hida.de) in the Helmholtz Association of German Research
```

From #7

criteria presented in this chapter could be the basis for a structured
review process that facilitates an unbiased evaluation of software tools
from various fields. Therefore, this list must be general enough to be
applied to research software from various research disciplines while
also respecting differences between fields (e.g. citation rates between
humanities and life sciences). The challenge to do justice to a wide
spectrum is e.g. reflected by suggesting criteria comprising different
levels (Hong 2014). Interestingly, one third of research software
repositories have a lifespan (defined as the time from the first time
any code was uploaded to the last contribution) of less than one day (median: 15
days) (Hasselbring et al. 2019) indicating that many codes are only made
available publicly for the publication in a journal (as increasingly encouraged or required by
journals (Resnik et al. 2019) and associated with higher
impact (Vandewalle 2012)) but are not maintained thereafter. One of the major
challenges in the endeavor to define a selection scheme for sustainable
funding of research software is to organize a fair and transparent

> review process. We believe that it is important that the review process

Author: Please see #5.

Reviewer 2: addressed in line 681

modified, code repository used, champion present, workforce stability,
support from other organizations, collaboration/partnership, and
integration with policy). They found that the various outputs are widely
accessible, but not necessarily sustained or maintained. Projects with
most sustainability influences often became institutionalized and met
required needs of the community (Hsu, Hutchison, and Langseth 2019). In
the field of open source software, the CHAOSS (Community Health
Analytics Open Source Software) project has developed metrics to
evaluate sustainability (CHAOSS 2019). One objective of CHAOSS is to
automatically generate project health reports based on software that
evaluates the metrics, with most of the metrics already covered. The UK
Software Sustainability Institute (SSI) suggested both a subjective
tutorial-based and a more objective criteria-based software evaluation
scheme (Jackson, Crouch, and Baxter 2019), the latter being available as
an online form (SSI 2019a). [ROpenSci](https://devguide.ropensci.org/softwarereviewintro.html) provides software reviews
for R developers, which have been very successful in the 

> community. 

Reviewer 2: The [review criteria](https://joss.readthedocs.io/en/latest/review_criteria.html#) of the Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS) focus on the aspects license, documentation, functionality, and tests. This list of essential items should be fulfilled by all research software that wants to be considered not only for publication but also for sustained funding.

Reviewer 2: The commit buttons are disabled. Any idea why @sdruskat?

> community. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
community. The [review criteria](https://joss.readthedocs.io/en/latest/review_criteria.html#) of the Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS) focus on the aspects license, documentation, functionality, and tests. This list of essential items should be fulfilled by all research software that wants to be considered not only for publication but also for sustained funding. 
```

breakthroughs of the 21st century. The first “picture” of a black hole
may be the most prominent recent example where astrophysical experiments
and the collection and processing of data had to be complemented with
sophisticated algorithms and software to enable research excellence (The
Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration et al. 2019). Similarly, it is
research software that allows us to get a glimpse of the consequences
our actions today have on the climate of tomorrow. However, an
implication of computer-based research is that findings and data can
only be reproduced, understood, and validated if the software that was
used in the research process is available and
maintained.  
At the same time, sustaining research software, and in particular open
research software, comes with a number of challenges. Commercial
research software often has revenue flows that can facilitate
sustainable software development, maintenance, and documentation as well
as the operation of adequate infrastructure. A large share of researchers (want to or have to) 
base their research on software that is often developed in-house or as a community
effort. Many of these software stacks can not be

> sustained – often because research software was not a first class

Author: ```suggestion
sustained – often because research software was not a primary
```

deliverable in a research project and hence remained in a prototype
state, or because of missing incentives and resources to maintain the
software after project funding ended. Another fundamental difference to
industrial software development is that most developers of academic
research software (often doctoral students or postdoctoral researchers)

> never receive training in sustainable software development or consider themselves professional software developers (cite survey here). In

Author: ```suggestion
never receive training in sustainable software development (cite survey here). In
```

Does self-awareness really play a role here? I don't think so (professional devs may or may not consider themselves professional, but it doesn't change the professionality of their work).

> particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary user of a

Author: ```suggestion
particular, as they see themselves usually as the primary users of a
```

In this paper, we describe the state of the practice and current
challenges for research software sustainability, and suggest measures to
be taken towards improvements to solve these challenges. The paper is
the result of a community effort, with work undertaken during two
workshops and subsequent collaborative work across the larger RSE
community in Germany: It has been initiated during a half-day workshop
at the first International Conference for Research Software Engineers in
Germany (deRSE19) in Potsdam, Germany on 5 June 2019 (de-RSE e.V. -
Society for Research Software 2019), and continued during a dedicated
two-day workshop in Berlin, Germany on 7 and 8 November 2019, which was
funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). Subsequently, the draft
produced during the latter event was opened up for review by the German
RSE community through *de-RSE e.V. - Society for Research Software*.

We mainly focus on the situation of research software and research
software engineers (RSEs) in Germany, where funding bodies increasingly
acknowledge the importance and value of sustainable research software
infrastructures. The German Research Foundation (Deutsche

> Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG), the largest funding body for basic

Author: ```suggestion
Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG), the largest funding body for fundamental
```

Both *basic* and *fundamental* are correct, but the latter maps better semantically to the meaning of "Grundlagenforschung" IMHO.

> research in Germany, for example, has opened a call for sustainable

Author: ```suggestion
research in Germany, for example, opened a call for sustainable
```

research software development (DFG 2016) at the end of 2016 and a second
call for quality management in research software (DFG 2019b) in June

> 2019. We note that the first call was oversubscribed by a factor of

Author: ```suggestion
2019. The first call was oversubscribed by a factor of
```

Citable source available? If not, just leave it as a statement ("we note that" not needed).

Reviewer 2: Not citeable. Was mentioned in an email from DFG as a response to the submitted letters of intent and proposals.

Author: Good enough IMHO. Would still delete "We note that".

10-15, a strong indicator of unmet demand. As another example, the 2019
“Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice” Code of Conduct of
the DFG (DFG 2019a) now explicitly list software side by side with
research results and data. The FAIR principles for research
data (Wilkinson et al. 2016) provide guidelines for data archiving, but
enabling full reproducibility and traceability of research software
requires additional steps (Hasselbring et al. 2019). In consequence,
there are ongoing discussions whether software should be considered as a
specific kind of research data or as a separate entity (Lamprecht et al.
2019).  
Unfortunately, guidelines and policies for sustainable research software
development in Germany are still lacking and long-term funding
strategies are missing. This all leads to unmet requirements and
unsolved challenges that we want to highlight in this paper by
elaborating on i) why research software engineering needs to

> be considered a first class citizen in the research landscape; ii) how

Author: ```suggestion
be considered a first class citizen in academic research; ii) how
```

Resolve mixed metaphor.

with the growth of the replication crisis - while the lack of universally
agreed-upon and supported good research software practice is not the main
reason for that crisis, it clearly is a contributing factor.

While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively
maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

To make software-based research (and with that almost any research)
reproducible, the used software must continue to exist. Furthermore, it must

> continue to be usable, understandable, and results return the

Author: ```suggestion
continue to be usable, understandable, and return the
```

> same results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the

Author: ```suggestion
continue to be usable, understandable, and results return
consistent results (or document potential changes and bug fixes) in the
```

Use more defensive wording, so as to not make the maximal claim that results must be the same, even for, e.g., Bayesian methods.

sustainable research software. They create better software for research,
which enables more and better research. RSEs have an inherent interest
in developing and working with high quality software, as part of
professional ethics as well as good research practice. RSEs build their
reputation on high quality software and software citation (Smith et al.
2016; Druskat 2019), which will open up new career paths. Finally, for
RSEs, creating sustainable research software is part of an attractive,
intellectually challenging, and satisfying work environment.

**Research leaders** as well as **research performing organizations**
mainly focus on the economic aspects and management of research,
i.e., available funds, people, and time employed to optimize research
output. Both need to make sure that their employees continually improve
their qualification and generate impact to improve their standing in the
various research communities and ensure continued funding. Overseeing
and enabling the creation of sustainable research software advances
their visibility in the field and makes their research endeavors both
more future-proof, and more easily traceable, reproducible, and

> verifiable and thus more likely to attract additional resources

Author: Is "verifiable" the correct term here?

Reviewer 2: OALD: "that can be checked to show whether it is true or accurate". Should be OK I guess

----------------------------------------------------

Funding is a crucial factor for sustaining research software. Currently
available sources and instruments are not adequately shaped for the
challenges and solutions outlined above. We recommend actions on the
individual, organizational, and national level.

Existing project-focused funding instruments on the local, national, and
international level need to be complemented with funding instruments
specifically designed for research software development and sustained
research software maintenance to make research software a first class
citizen in the research landscape. For example, software projects
enhancing research and fulfilling the sustainability criteria detailed
above may be entitled for sustained funding as long as they
live up to the standards and remain a central component of the research
landscape.

Computing centers and supercomputing facilities for research need to
receive earmarked resources for the support of sustainable software
development. This funding is necessary to provide continuous integration
services, a hardware portfolio for development, testing and benchmarking

> software, as well as personnel for traini

Author: Is this really needed for *sustaining* research software? The point being, that some software used in research must be parallelized regardless of whether it is sustained or not. SCR are more of a requirement for research in general. Perhaps shorten the section in total, but strengthen the point that containerization may be one way to make a software (environment) more sustainable.

Author: Transferred to Overleaf.

> software, as well as personnel for traini

Author: Not quite true ("lacking"/"globally accessible", cf. Invenio, Zenodo, Software Heritage). Perhaps focus more on usability of platforms (e.g., GH-Zenodo bridge), structural issues (push/pull methods for Software Heritage), awareness?

Author: Transferred to Overleaf.

but also pertaining to the responsible use of resources. The damage
that failing to do is causing both to the progress of the research community
and to the credibility of academic research in society is becoming increasingly clear
with the growth of the replication crisis - while the lack of universally
agreed-upon and supported good research software practice is not the main
reason for that crisis, it clearly is a contributing factor.

While it is obvious that software qualifies as a potentially re-usable
digital artifact, the additional benefit of not just reproducing a given
scenario, but transferring software use to new problems, domains, and/or
applications, justifies developing research software with a long-term
perspective as *sustainable research software*.

In order to support research, a sustainable software must be
correct (Hatton 2007; Chang et al. 2006; Matthews 2007), validatable,
understandable, documented, publicly released, adequately published
(i.e. in persistently identifiable form as software source code (Smith
et al. 2016), and potentially in an additional paper which describes the
software concept, design decisions and development rationale), actively

> maintained, and (re-)usable (Merali 2010; Barnes 2010; Tse 2010).

Author: Added the following paragraph after this line to resolve https://github.com/DE-RSE/positions/pull/1/files#r370522502:

```
We also argue that truly sustainable research software must be published under a Free and Open Source Software license, and follow an open development model, to (1) enable the validation of research results that have been produced using software, (2) enable the reproducibility of software-based research, (3) enable improvement and (re-) use of the software to support more and better research, and reduce resources to be spent on software development, (4) reduce legal issues (see section on legal issues below), (5) meet ethical obligations from public funding, and (6) open research software to the general public, i.e., the stakeholder group with arguably the greatest interest in furthering research knowledge and improving research for the benefit of all.
```

@bussec What do you think?

Reviewer 7: @sdruskat Fine with me! Maybe include an additional point that focuses more from the open development process, e.g., "(X) facilitate the growth of a community of developers and users around the project".

Also, I agree with @knarrff as the first line is rather explicit in its wording and not everyone shares this level of enthusiasm for Free Software ;-)
